---
type: bible
title: First Thessalonians – Introduction – Ignatius Catholic Study Bible
aliases:
  - First Thessalonians – Introduction – Ignatius Catholic Study Bible
tags:
  - bible/new-testament
created: 2026-04-01
modified: 2026-04-09
publish: true
description: First Thessalonians – Introduction – Ignatius Catholic Study Bible
---

# Introduction

**Author** First Thessalonians is a genuine letter of the Apostle Paul. His name opens the epistle (1:1); tradition from earliest times supports this ascription; and only a few modern scholars have ever questioned its authenticity. Indeed, the letter is covered from beginning to end with the unmistakable fingerprints of Paul\'s language, style, and character known from his other writings. Internal evidence shows us that Paul is writing as the leader and spokesman of his missionary team, which at this time included Silvanus and Timothy (1:1). This explains why so many of his comments and instructions are formulated in the first person plural (\"we\"/\"us\"/\"our\", 1:2; 2:1; 3:1; 4:1; etc).

**Date** It is widely held that 1 Thessalonians is the oldest letter we have from Paul and may be the oldest book in the entire canon of the NT. By coordinating the report in 3:1-5 with the historical record of Acts 17:1-18:5, most scholars agree that Paul must have penned this letter in the winter months of late A.D. 50 or early 51, soon after Silvanus and Timothy rejoined him in Corinth (Acts 18:5).

**Destination** Thessalonica was a bustling commercial city founded in 316 B.C. and established by the Romans as the provincial capital of Macedonia (northern Greece) in 146 B.C. The city was ideally situated for trade, having a port into the Aegean Sea and positioned on the Egnatian Way, an overland highway that linked the eastern and western parts of the Mediterranean. Paganism and idolatry dominated the religious environment in Thessalonica, although it was also home to a Jewish colony with at least one synagogue. Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy (1:1) founded the Thessalonian Church in A.D. 50 on the apostle\'s second missionary tour (Acts 17:1-9). Initially, they spent several weeks preaching in the synagogue and saw the conversion of Jews, Greeks, and several leading women from the city (Acts 17:4). However, enraged by the missionaries\' success, certain Jews from the city incited riots and forced the missionaries out of Thessalonica only weeks (or possibly months) after their arrival, causing them trouble as far as Beroea (Acts 17:5, 13). The community left behind remained a target of local persecution (1 Thess 1:6; 2:14; 2 Thess 1:4). A majority of the community were Gentiles who had abandoned idolatry for Christianity (1:9).

**Purpose and Themes** First Thessalonians is a predominantly pastoral letter with a pastoral focus. Paul wrote out of a deep concern for these recent converts who were unexpectedly left alone to withstand the rising tide of persecution and the constant pressures of paganism. Absent in person and eager to return (3:10), Paul sent the epistle in his place to strengthen them through these difficult times (3:3-5), to encourage them to be chaste and charitable (4:1-12), and to console the bereaved among them with the hope of resurrection (4:13-14). Expressions of joy, gratitude, and encouragement punctuate the letter as Paul affirms them for their astonishing growth (1:8) in faith, hope, and love (1:3; 3:6; 5:8). There are no rebukes for the Thessalonians, only appeals to stay on the same course (4:1; 5:11).

The substance of the letter, though more personal than theological, is not lacking in doctrinal content. This is evident in Paul\'s emphasis on eschatology (teaching concerning the end times). At least once in every chapter he mentions the return of Jesus Christ in glory. According to Paul, Christ will come again from heaven to deliver us \"from the wrath to come\" (1:10) and give us the final \"salvation\" for which we yearn (5:9). His prayer is that Christ will perfect the \"love\" of his readers (3:12) and establish them forever in \"holiness\" at his arrival (3:13; cf. 5:23). The apostle is confident he will be proud of the Thessalonians on that day and expects to wear them like a \"crown\" before the Lord (2:19). The subject of eschatology has pressing importance for certain readers who are anxious about the fate of their deceased relatives and friends (4:13). Paul assures them that, as God raised Jesus from the dead and carried him into heaven, so too he will raise the righteous at the blast of the final trumpet and escort them into glory (4:14-18). Because the last day will \"come like a thief\" (5:2), Paul challenges readers to stay awake both morally and spiritually in anticipation of the Second Coming (5:1-11). Otherwise they will be caught unprepared when Jesus returns as Judge to avenge the wicked for their evil deeds (4:6). In Paul\'s mind, this itinerary for the end of days is revealed to give comfort and hope to the saints struggling on earth (4:18). «
