---
title: I. The Sacraments of Christ
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-02
type: catechism
publish: true
aliases:
  - 2.1.1.2.p30
  - ccc-1114
  - ccc-1115
  - ccc-1116
  - I. the Sacraments of Christ
  - I. The Sacraments of Christ
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-2
  - vault-admin/graph/bible-ccc
author: Catholic Church
ccc_chapter: one
ccc_part: two
ccc_section: one
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P30.HTM
---

- PART TWO: THE CELEBRATION OF THE CHRISTIAN MYSTERY
	- SECTION ONE THE SACRAMENTAL ECONOMY
		- CHAPTER ONE THE PASCHAL MYSTERY IN THE AGE OF THE CHURCH
			- Article 2 THE PASCHAL MYSTERY IN THE CHURCH'S SACRAMENTS
				- I. The Sacraments of Christ

**[[2.1.1.2.p2z|Previous]]** - **[[2.1.1.2.p31|Next]]**

---

# I. the Sacraments of Christ

1114 "Adhering to the teaching of the Holy Scriptures, to the apostolic traditions, and to the consensus... of the Fathers," we profess that "the sacraments of the new law were... all instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord."<sup>31</sup> ^ccc-1114

1115 Jesus' words and actions during his hidden life and public ministry were already salvific, for they anticipated the power of his Paschal mystery. They announced and prepared what he was going to give the Church when all was accomplished. the mysteries of Christ's life are the foundations of what he would henceforth dispense in the sacraments, through the ministers of his Church, for "what was visible in our Savior has passed over into his mysteries."<sup>32</sup> ^ccc-1115

1116 Sacraments are "powers that comes forth" from the Body of Christ,<sup>33</sup> which is ever-living and life-giving. They are actions of the Holy Spirit at work in his Body, the Church. They are "the masterworks of God" in the new and everlasting covenant. ^ccc-1116

---

**[31]** Council of Trent (1547): DS 1600-1601.**[32]** St. Leo the Great Sermo. 74, 2: PL 54, 398.**[33]** Cf. [[luke-05| [[luke-05|Lk 5]]:]]:17; 6:19; 8:46.
