---
type: catechism
title: Section 2. The Seven Sacraments of the Church
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P3E.HTM
aliases:
  - 2.2.0.0.p3e
  - ccc-1210
  - ccc-1211
  - Section 2. The Seven Sacraments of the Church
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-2
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/sacrament
ccc_part: two
ccc_section: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
---

- PART TWO: THE CELEBRATION OF THE CHRISTIAN MYSTERY
	- SECTION TWO THE SEVEN SACRAMENTS OF THE CHURCH

**[[2.1.2.2.p3d|Previous]]** - **[[2.2.1.0.p3f|Next]]**

---

# Section 2. The Seven Sacraments of the Church

1210 Christ instituted the sacraments of the new law. There are seven: Baptism, Confirmation (or Chrismation), the Eucharist, Penance, the [[anointing-of-the-sick|Anointing of the Sick]], [[holy-orders|Holy Orders]] and Matrimony. the seven sacraments touch all the stages and all the important moments of Christian life:<sup>1</sup> they give birth and increase, healing and mission to the Christian's life of faith. There is thus a certain resemblance between the stages of natural life and the stages of the spiritual life. ^ccc-1210

1211 Following this analogy, the first chapter will expound the three sacraments of Christian initiation; the second, the sacraments of healing; and the third, the sacraments at the service of communion and the mission of the faithful. This order, while not the only one possible, does allow one to see that the sacraments form an organic whole in which each particular sacrament has its own vital place. In this organic whole, the Eucharist occupies a unique place as the "Sacrament of sacraments": "all the other sacraments are ordered to it as to their end."<sup>2</sup> ^ccc-1211

---

**[1]** Cf. St. Thomas Aquinas, STh III, 65, 1.**[2]** St. Thomas Aquinas, STh III, 65, 3.
