---
type: catechism
title: II. Who Receives and Who Administers This Sacrament?
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P4L.HTM
aliases:
  - 2.2.2.5.p4l
  - 20250727-0059
  - ccc-1514
  - ccc-1515
  - ccc-1516
  - Ii. Who Receives and Who Administers This Sacrament?
  - II. Who Receives and Who Administers This Sacrament?
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-2
  - graph/bible-ccc
ccc_part: two
ccc_section: two
ccc_chapter: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-04
publish: true
description: "Part Two: the Celebration of the Christian Mystery Section Two the SevenmSacraments of the Church > Chapter Two the Sacraments of Healing > Article 5 the [[anointing-of-the-sick|Anointing of the Sick]] > II. Who Receives and Who Administers This Sacrament?"
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART TWO: THE CELEBRATION OF THE CHRISTIAN MYSTERY
	- SECTION TWO THE SEVEN SACRAMENTS OF THE CHURCH
		- CHAPTER TWO THE SACRAMENTS OF HEALING
			- Article 5 THE [[anointing-of-the-sick|Anointing of the Sick]]
				- II. Who Receives and Who Administers This Sacrament?

**[[2.2.2.5.p4k|Previous]]** - **[[2.2.2.5.p4m|Next]]**

---

# Ii. Who Receives and Who Administers This Sacrament?

In case of grave illness...

1514 The [[anointing-of-the-sick|Anointing of the Sick]] "is not a sacrament for those only who are at the point of death. Hence, as soon as anyone of the faithful begins to be in danger of death from sickness or old age, the fitting time for him to receive this sacrament has certainly already arrived."<sup>129</sup> ^ccc-1514

1515 If a sick person who received this anointing recovers his health, he can in the case of another grave illness receive this sacrament again. If during the same illness the person's condition becomes more serious, the sacrament may be repeated. It is fitting to receive the [[anointing-of-the-sick|Anointing of the Sick]] just prior to a serious operation. the same holds for the elderly whose frailty becomes more pronounced. ^ccc-1515

"... let him call for the presbyters of the Church"

1516 Only priests (bishops and presbyters) are ministers of the [[anointing-of-the-sick|Anointing of the Sick]].<sup>130</sup> It is the duty of pastors to instruct the faithful on the benefits of this sacrament. the faithful should encourage the sick to call for a priest to receive this sacrament. the sick should prepare themselves to receive it with good dispositions, assisted by their pastor and the whole ecclesial community, which is invited to surround the sick in a special way through their prayers and fraternal attention. ^ccc-1516

---

**[129]** SC 73; cf. CIC, Can. 1004 # 1; 1005; 1007; CCEO, Can. 738.**[130]** Cf. Council of Trent (1551): DS 1697; 1719; CIC, Can. 1003; CCEO, Can. 739 # 1.