---
title: I. The Eucharist - Source and Summit of Ecclesial Life
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-02
type: catechism
publish: true
aliases:
  - 2.2.1.3.pp3x
  - ccc-1324
  - ccc-1325
  - ccc-1326
  - ccc-1327
  - I. the Eucharist - Source and Summit of Ecclesial Life
  - I. The Eucharist - Source and Summit of Ecclesial Life
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-2
  - vault-admin/graph/bible-ccc
author: Catholic Church
ccc_chapter: one
ccc_part: two
ccc_section: two
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P3X.HTM
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART TWO: THE CELEBRATION OF THE CHRISTIAN MYSTERY
	- SECTION TWO THE SEVEN SACRAMENTS OF THE CHURCH
		- CHAPTER ONE THE SACRAMENTS OF CHRISTIAN INITIATION
			- Article 3 THE SACRAMENT OF THE EUCHARIST
				- I. The Eucharist - Source and Summit of Ecclesial Life

**[[2.2.1.3.p3w|Previous]]** - **[[2.2.1.3.pp3y|Next]]**

---

# I. the Eucharist - Source and Summit of Ecclesial Life

1324 The Eucharist is "the source and summit of the Christian life."<sup>134</sup> "The other sacraments, and indeed all ecclesiastical ministries and works of the apostolate, are bound up with the Eucharist and are oriented toward it. For in the blessed Eucharist is contained the whole spiritual good of the Church, namely Christ himself, our Pasch."<sup>135</sup> ^ccc-1324

1325 "The Eucharist is the efficacious sign and sublime cause of that communion in the divine life and that unity of the People of God by which the Church is kept in being. It is the culmination both of God's action sanctifying the world in Christ and of the worship men offer to Christ and through him to the Father in the Holy Spirit."<sup>136</sup> ^ccc-1325

1326 Finally, by the Eucharistic celebration we already unite ourselves with the heavenly liturgy and anticipate eternal life, when God will be all in all.<sup>137</sup> ^ccc-1326

1327 In brief, the Eucharist is the sum and summary of our faith: "Our way of thinking is attuned to the Eucharist, and the Eucharist in turn confirms our way of thinking."<sup>138</sup> ^ccc-1327

---

**[134]** LG 11.**[135]** PO 5.**[136]** Congregation of Rites, instruction, Eucharisticum mysterium, 6.**[137]** Cf. [[1-corinthians-15#^1-corinthians-15-28|1 Cor 15:28.]]**[138]** St. Irenaeus, Adv. haeres. 4, 18, 5: PG 7/l, 1028.
