---
type: catechism
title: III. The Effects of Confirmation
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P3S.HTM
aliases:
  - 2.2.1.2.p3s
  - ccc-1302
  - ccc-1303
  - ccc-1304
  - ccc-1305
  - III. The Effects of Confirmation
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-2
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/character-sacramental
ccc_part: two
ccc_section: two
ccc_chapter: one
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Catechism of the Catholic Church TOC]]

---

- PART TWO: THE CELEBRATION OF THE CHRISTIAN MYSTERY
	- SECTION TWO THE SEVEN SACRAMENTS OF THE CHURCH
		- CHAPTER ONE THE SACRAMENTS OF CHRISTIAN INITIATION
			- Article 2 THE SACRAMENT OF CONFIRMATION
				- III. The Effects of Confirmation

**[[2.2.1.2.p3r|Previous]]** - **[[2.2.1.2.p3t|Next]]**

---

# III. The Effects of Confirmation

1302 It is evident from its celebration that the effect of the sacrament of Confirmation is the full outpouring of the Holy Spirit as once granted to the apostles on the day of Pentecost. ^ccc-1302

1303 From this fact, Confirmation brings an increase and deepening of baptismal grace: ^ccc-1303

\- it roots us more deeply in the divine filiation which makes us cry, "Abba! Father!";<sup>115</sup>

\- it unites us more firmly to Christ;

\- it increases the gifts of the Holy Spirit in us;

\- it renders our bond with the Church more perfect;<sup>116</sup>

\- it gives us a special strength of the Holy Spirit to spread and defend the faith by word and action as true witnesses of Christ, to confess the name of Christ boldly, and never to be ashamed of the Cross:<sup>117</sup>

Recall then that you have received the spiritual seal, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of right judgment and courage, the spirit of knowledge and reverence, the spirit of holy fear in God's presence. Guard what you have received. God the Father has marked you with his sign; Christ the Lord has confirmed you and has placed his pledge, the Spirit, in your hearts.<sup>118</sup>

1304 Like Baptism which it completes, Confirmation is given only once, for it too imprints on the soul an indelible spiritual mark, the "character," which is the sign that Jesus Christ has marked a Christian with the seal of his Spirit by clothing him with power from on high so that he may be his witness.<sup>119</sup> ^ccc-1304

1305 This "character" perfects the common priesthood of the faithful, received in Baptism, and "the confirmed person receives the power to profess faith in Christ publicly and as it were officially (quasi ex officio)."<sup>120</sup> ^ccc-1305

---

**[115]** [[romans-08#^romans-08-15|Rom 8:15.]]**[116]** Cf. LG 11.**[117]** Cf. Council of Florence (1439) DS 1319; LG 11; 12.**[118]** SL Ambrose, De myst. 7, 42 PL 16, 402-403.**[119]** Cf. Council of Trent (1547) DS 1609; [[luke-24|Lk 24]]:48-49.**[120]** St. Thomas Aquinas, STh III, 72, 5, ad 2.
