---
type: catechism
title: III. How Is This Sacrament Celebrated?
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P4M.HTM
aliases:
  - 2.2.2.5.p4m
  - ccc-1517
  - ccc-1518
  - ccc-1519
  - Iii. how is This Sacrament Celebrated?
  - III. How Is This Sacrament Celebrated?
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-2
  - graph/bible-ccc
ccc_part: two
ccc_section: two
ccc_chapter: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-04
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART TWO: THE CELEBRATION OF THE CHRISTIAN MYSTERY
	- SECTION TWO THE SEVEN SACRAMENTS OF THE CHURCH
		- CHAPTER TWO THE SACRAMENTS OF HEALING
			- Article 5 THE [[anointing-of-the-sick|Anointing of the Sick]]
				- III. How is This Sacrament Celebrated?

**[[2.2.2.5.p4l|Previous]]** - **[[2.2.2.5.p4n|Next]]**

---

# Iii. How Is This Sacrament Celebrated?

1517 Like all the sacraments the [[anointing-of-the-sick|Anointing of the Sick]] is a liturgical and communal celebration,<sup>131</sup> whether it takes place in the family home, a hospital or church, for a single sick person or a whole group of sick persons. It is very fitting to celebrate it within the Eucharist, the memorial of the Lord's Passover. If circumstances suggest it, the celebration of the sacrament can be preceded by the sacrament of Penance and followed by the sacrament of the Eucharist. As the sacrament of Christ's Passover the Eucharist should always be the last sacrament of the earthly journey, the "viaticum" for "passing over" to eternal life. ^ccc-1517

1518 Word and sacrament form an indivisible whole. the Liturgy of the Word, preceded by an act of repentance, opens the celebration. the words of Christ, the witness of the apostles, awaken the faith of the sick person and of the community to ask the Lord for the strength of his Spirit. ^ccc-1518

1519 The celebration of the sacrament includes the following principal elements: the "priests of the Church"<sup>132</sup> - in silence - lay hands on the sick; they pray over them in the faith of the Church<sup>133</sup> - this is the epiclesis proper to this sacrament; they then anoint them with oil blessed, if possible, by the bishop. ^ccc-1519

These liturgical actions indicate what grace this sacrament confers upon the sick.

---

**[131]** Cf. SC 27.**[132]** [[james-05#^james-05-14|Jas 5:14.]]**[133]** Cf. [[james-05#^james-05-15|Jas 5:15.]]
