---
type: catechism
title: I. What Is This Sacrament Called?
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P47.HTM
aliases:
  - 2.2.2.4.p47
  - ccc-1423
  - ccc-1424
  - I. what is This Sacrament Called?
  - I. What Is This Sacrament Called?
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-2
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/absolution
  - term/conversion
ccc_part: two
ccc_section: two
ccc_chapter: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-04
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART TWO: THE CELEBRATION OF THE CHRISTIAN MYSTERY
	- SECTION TWO THE SEVEN SACRAMENTS OF THE CHURCH
		- CHAPTER TWO THE SACRAMENTS OF HEALING
			- Article 4 THE SACRAMENT OF PENANCE AND RECONCILIATION
				- I. What is This Sacrament Called?

**[[2.2.2.4.p46|Previous]]** - **[[2.2.2.4.p48|Next]]**

---

# I. What Is This Sacrament Called?

1423 It is called the sacrament of conversion because it makes sacramentally present Jesus' call to conversion, the first step in returning to the Father<sup>5</sup> from whom one has strayed by sin. ^ccc-1423

It is called the sacrament of Penance, since it consecrates the Christian sinner's personal and ecclesial steps of conversion, penance, and satisfaction.

1424 It is called the sacrament of confession, since the disclosure or confession of sins to a priest is an essential element of this sacrament. In a profound sense it is also a "confession" - acknowledgment and praise - of the holiness of God and of his mercy toward sinful man. ^ccc-1424

It is called the sacrament of forgiveness, since by the priest's sacramental [[absolution]] God grants the penitent "pardon and peace."<sup>6</sup>

It is called the sacrament of Reconciliation, because it imparts to the sinner the love of God who reconciles: "Be reconciled to God."<sup>7</sup> He who lives by God's merciful love is ready to respond to the Lord's call: "Go; first be reconciled to your brother."<sup>8</sup>

---

**[5]** Cf. [[mark-01|Mk 1]]:15; [[luke-15|Lk 15]]:18.**[6]** OP 46 formula of [[absolution]].**[7]** [[2-corinthians-05|2 Cor 5]]:20.**[8]** [[matthew-05|Mt 5]]:24.
