---
title: IV. Who Can Receive Baptism?
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-02
type: catechism
publish: true
aliases:
  - 2.2.1.0.p3k
  - ccc-1246
  - ccc-1247
  - ccc-1248
  - ccc-1249
  - ccc-1250
  - ccc-1251
  - ccc-1252
  - ccc-1253
  - ccc-1254
  - ccc-1255
  - Iv. Who Can Receive Baptism?
  - IV. Who Can Receive Baptism?
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-2
  - term/catechumen
  - term/godparent
  - vault-admin/graph/bible-ccc
author: Catholic Church
ccc_chapter: one
ccc_part: two
ccc_section: two
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P3K.HTM
---

- PART TWO: THE CELEBRATION OF THE CHRISTIAN MYSTERY
	- SECTION TWO THE SEVEN SACRAMENTS OF THE CHURCH
		- CHAPTER ONE THE SACRAMENTS OF CHRISTIAN INITIATION
			- Article 1 THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM
				- IV. Who can Receive Baptism?

**[[2.2.1.0.p3j|Previous]]** - **[[2.2.1.0.p3l|Next]]**

---

# Iv. Who Can Receive Baptism?

1246 "Every person not yet baptized and only such a person is able to be baptized."<sup>46</sup> ^ccc-1246

The Baptism of adults

1247 Since the beginning of the Church, adult Baptism is the common practice where the proclamation of the Gospel is still new. the catechumenate (preparation for Baptism) therefore occupies an important place. This initiation into Christian faith and life should dispose the catechumen to receive the gift of God in Baptism, Confirmation, and the Eucharist. ^ccc-1247

1248 The catechumenate, or formation of catechumens, aims at bringing their conversion and faith to maturity, in response to the divine initiative and in union with an ecclesial community. the catechumenate is to be "a formation in the whole Christian life... during which the disciples will be joined to Christ their teacher. the catechumens should be properly initiated into the mystery of salvation and the practice of the evangelical virtues, and they should be introduced into the life of faith, liturgy, and charity of the People of God by successive sacred rites."<sup>47</sup> ^ccc-1248

1249 Catechumens "are already joined to the Church, they are already of the household of Christ, and are quite frequently already living a life of faith, hope, and charity."<sup>48</sup> "With love and solicitude mother Church already embraces them as her own."<sup>49</sup> ^ccc-1249

The Baptism of infants

1250 Born with a fallen human nature and tainted by original sin, children also have need of the new birth in Baptism to be freed from the power of darkness and brought into the realm of the freedom of the children of God, to which all men are called.<sup>50</sup> The sheer gratuitousness of the grace of salvation is particularly manifest in infant Baptism. the Church and the parents would deny a child the priceless grace of becoming a child of God were they not to confer Baptism shortly after birth.<sup>51</sup> ^ccc-1250

1251 Christian parents will recognize that this practice also accords with their role as nurturers of the life that God has entrusted to them.<sup>52</sup> ^ccc-1251

1252 The practice of infant Baptism is an immemorial tradition of the Church. There is explicit testimony to this practice from the second century on, and it is quite possible that, from the beginning of the apostolic preaching, when whole "households" received baptism, infants may also have been baptized.<sup>53</sup> ^ccc-1252

Faith and Baptism

1253 Baptism is the sacrament of faith.<sup>54</sup> But faith needs the community of believers. It is only within the faith of the Church that each of the faithful can believe. the faith required for Baptism is not a perfect and mature faith, but a beginning that is called to develop. the catechumen or the godparent is asked: "What do you ask of God's Church?" the response is: "Faith!" ^ccc-1253

1254 For all the baptized, children or adults, faith must grow after Baptism. For this reason the Church celebrates each year at the Easter Vigil the renewal of baptismal promises. Preparation for Baptism leads only to the threshold of new life. Baptism is the source of that new life in Christ from which the entire Christian life springs forth. ^ccc-1254

1255 For the grace of Baptism to unfold, the parents' help is important. So too is the role of the godfather and godmother, who must be firm believers, able and ready to help the newly baptized - child or adult on the road of Christian life.<sup>55</sup> Their task is a truly ecclesial function (officium).<sup>56</sup> The whole ecclesial community bears some responsibility for the development and safeguarding of the grace given at Baptism. ^ccc-1255

---

**[46]** CIC, can. 864; cf. CCEO, can. 679.**[47]** AG 14; cf. RCIA 19; 98.**[48]** AG 14 # 5.**[49]** LG 14 # 3; cf. CIC, can. 206; 788 # 3.**[50]** Cf. Council of Trent (1546): DS 1514; cf. [[colossians-01#^colossians-01-12|Col 1:12-14.]]**[51]** Cf. CIC, can. 867; CCEO, can. 681; 686, 1.**[52]** Cf. LG 11; 41; GS 48; CIC, can. 868.**[53]** Cf. [[acts-of-the-apostles-16|Acts 16]]:15, 33; 18:8; [[1-corinthians-01|1 Cor 1]]:16; CDF, instruction, Pastoralis actio: AAS 72 (1980) 1137-1156.**[54]** Cf. [[mark-16|Mk 16]]:16.**[55]** Cf. CIC, can. 872-874.**[56]** Cf. SC 67.