---
title: "Quote of the Day, 15 April: St. Edith Stein"
url: "https://carmelitequotes.blog/2026/04/14/edith19340415/"
author:
  - "Carmelite Quotes"
created: 2026-04-17
description: "On the anniversary of her clothing in Carmel (April 15, 1934), the Church recalls how Saint Edith Stein describes the hidden work of grace: formed in deep prayer, expressed in daily fidelity, and repaid through quiet sacrifices, self-control, and loving service within the ordinary rhythm of community life"
tags:
  - "carmel/quotes"
aliases: "quote-of-the-day-15-april:-st-edith-stein"
type: "carmelite-quote"
publish: "false"
---
2026-04-17

# Quote of the Day, 15 April: St. Edith Stein

The walls of our monasteries enclose a narrow space. To erect the structure of holiness in it, one must dig deep and build high, must descend into the depths of the dark night of one’s own nothingness in order to be raised up high into the sunlight of divine love and compassion.

No human eye can see what God does in the soul during hours of inner prayer. It is grace upon grace. And all of life’s other hours are our thanks for them. Carmelites can repay God’s love by their everyday lives in no other way than by carrying out their daily duties faithfully in every respect— all the little sacrifices that a regimen structured day after day in all its details demands of an active spirit; all the self-control that living in close proximity with different kinds of people continually requires and that is achieved with a loving smile; letting no opportunity go by for serving others in love.

#### Saint Edith Stein

*On the History and Spirit of Carmel (31 March 1935)*

**Note:** On 15 April 1934, St. Edith Stein was clothed in the Carmelite habit and gave herself lovingly to God in the Carmel of Cologne-Lindenthal. Her novice mistress, [Sr. Teresa Renata Posselt, OCD, described that day](https://carmelitequotes.blog/2021/04/14/posselt-bio-edith-clothing/): “it was a feast such as the Cologne Carmel has never seen.”

Stein, E 2014, *The Hidden Life: hagiographic essays, meditations, spiritual texts*, Stein, W (trans.), [ICS Publications](https://www.icspublications.org/collections/edith-stein), Washington DC.

**Featured image:** Edith Stein on her clothing day, 15 April 1934. Image credit: Discalced Carmelites

**Source:** carmelitequotes.blog