---
type: catechism
title: III. The Different Kinds of Sins
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P6B.HTM
aliases:
  - 3.1.1.8.p6b
  - ccc-1852
  - ccc-1853
  - III. The Different Kinds of Sins
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/sin
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: one
ccc_chapter: one
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION ONE MAN'S VOCATION LIFE IN THE SPIRIT
		- CHAPTER ONE THE DIGNITY OF THE HUMAN PERSON
			- Article 8 SIN
				- III. The Different Kinds of Sins

**[[3.1.1.8.p6a|Previous]]** - **[[3.1.1.8.p6c|Next]]**

---

# III. The Different Kinds of Sins

1852 There are a great many kinds of sins. Scripture provides several lists of them. the Letter to the Galatians contrasts the works of the flesh with the fruit of the Spirit: "Now the works of the flesh are plain: fornication, impurity, licentiousness, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, anger, selfishness, dissension, factions, envy, drunkenness, carousing, and the like. I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God."<sup>127</sup> ^ccc-1852

1853 Sins can be distinguished according to their objects, as can every human act; or according to the virtues they oppose, by excess or defect; or according to the commandments they violate. They can also be classed according to whether they concern God, neighbor, or oneself; they can be divided into spiritual and carnal sins, or again as sins in thought, word, deed, or omission. the root of sin is in the heart of man, in his free will, according to the teaching of the Lord: "For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murder, [[adultery]], fornication, theft, false witness, slander. These are what defile a man."<sup>128</sup> But in the heart also resides charity, the source of the good and pure works, which sin wounds. ^ccc-1853

---

**[127]** [[galatians-05#^galatians-05-19|Gal 5:19-21;]] CE [[romans-01|Rom 1]]:28-32; 1 Cor 9-10; [[ephesians-05#^ephesians-05-3|Eph 5:3-5;]] [[colossians-03#^colossians-03-5|Col 3:5-8;]] 1 Tim 9-10; 2 Tim 2-5.**[128]** [[matthew-15|Mt 15]]:19-20.
