---
type: catechism
title: I. Mercy and Sin
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P69.HTM
aliases:
  - 3.1.1.8.p69
  - ccc-1846
  - ccc-1847
  - ccc-1848
  - I. Mercy and Sin
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - graph/bible-ccc
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: one
ccc_chapter: one
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION ONE MAN'S VOCATION LIFE IN THE SPIRIT
		- CHAPTER ONE THE DIGNITY OF THE HUMAN PERSON
			- Article 8 SIN
				- I. Mercy and Sin

**[[3.1.1.7.p68|Previous]]** - **[[3.1.1.8.p6a|Next]]**

---

**Article 8**

**SIN**

# I. Mercy and sin

1846 The Gospel is the revelation in Jesus Christ of God's mercy to sinners.<sup>113</sup> The angel announced to Joseph: "You shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins."<sup>114</sup> The same is true of the Eucharist, the sacrament of redemption: "This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins."<sup>115</sup> ^ccc-1846

1847 "God created us without us: but he did not will to save us without us."<sup>116</sup> To receive his mercy, we must admit our faults. "If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just, and will forgive our sins and cleanse us from all unrighteousness."<sup>117</sup> ^ccc-1847

1848 As St. Paul affirms, "Where sin increased, grace abounded all the more."<sup>118</sup> But to do its work grace must uncover sin so as to convert our hearts and bestow on us "righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ ourLord."<sup>119</sup> Like a physician who probes the wound before treating it, God, by his Word and by his Spirit, casts a living light on sin: ^ccc-1848

Conversion requires convincing of sin; it includes the interior judgment of conscience, and this, being a proof of the action of the Spirit of truth in man's inmost being, becomes at the same time the start of a new grant of grace and love: "Receive the Holy Spirit." Thus in this "convincing concerning sin" we discover a double gift: the gift of the truth of conscience and the gift of the certainty of redemption. the Spirit of truth is the Consoler.<sup>120</sup>

---

**[113]** Cf. Lk 15.**[114]** [[matthew-01|Mt 1]]:21.**[115]** [[matthew-26|Mt 26]]:28.**[116]** St. Augustine, Sermo 169, 11, 13: PL 38, 923.**[117]** 1 Jn 8-9.**[118]** [[romans-05#^romans-05-20|Rom 5:20.]]**[119]** [[romans-05#^romans-05-21|Rom 5:21.]]**[120]** John Paul II, DeV 31 # 2.