---
title: II. The Definition of Sin
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-02
type: catechism
publish: true
aliases:
  - 3.1.1.8.p6a
  - ccc-1849
  - ccc-1850
  - ccc-1851
  - Ii. the Definition of sin
  - Ii. the Definition of Sin
  - II. The Definition of Sin
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - term/sin
  - vault-admin/graph/bible-ccc
author: Catholic Church
ccc_chapter: one
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: one
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P6A.HTM
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION ONE MAN'S VOCATION LIFE IN THE SPIRIT
		- CHAPTER ONE THE DIGNITY OF THE HUMAN PERSON
			- Article 8 SIN
				- II. The Definition of Sin

**[[3.1.1.8.p69|Previous]]** - **[[3.1.1.8.p6b|Next]]**

---

# Ii. the Definition of sin

1849 Sin is an offense against reason, truth, and right conscience; it is failure in genuine love for God and neighbor caused by a perverse attachment to certain goods. It wounds the nature of man and injures human solidarity. It has been defined as "an utterance, a deed, or a desire contrary to the eternal law."<sup>121</sup> ^ccc-1849

1850 Sin is an offense against God: "Against you, you alone, have I sinned, and done that which is evil in your sight."<sup>122</sup> Sin sets itself against God's love for us and turns our hearts away from it. Like the first sin, it is disobedience, a revolt against God through the will to become "like gods,"<sup>123</sup> knowing and determining good and evil. Sin is thus "love of oneself even to contempt of God."<sup>124</sup> In this proud self-exaltation, sin is diametrically opposed to the obedience of Jesus, which achieves our salvation.<sup>125</sup> ^ccc-1850

1851 It is precisely in the Passion, when the mercy of Christ is about to vanquish it, that sin most clearly manifests its violence and its many forms: unbelief, murderous hatred, shunning and mockery by the leaders and the people, Pilate's cowardice and the cruelty of the soldiers, Judas' betrayal - so bitter to Jesus, Peter's denial and the disciples' flight. However, at the very hour of darkness, the hour of the prince of this world,<sup>126</sup> The sacrifice of Christ secretly becomes the source from which the forgiveness of our sins will pour forth inexhaustibly. ^ccc-1851

---

**[121]** St. Augustine, Contra Faustum 22: PL 42, 418; St. Thomas Aquinas, STh I-II, 71, 6.**[122]** [[psalm-51#^psalm-51-4|Ps 51:4.]]**[123]** [[genesis-03|Gen 3]]:5.**[124]** St. Augustine, De civ. Dei 14, 28: PL 41, 436.**[125]** Cf. [[philippians-02#^philippians-02-6|Phil 2:6-9.]]**[126]** Cf. [[john-14#^john-14-30|Jn 14:30.]]
