---
type: catechism
title: II. The Formation of Conscience
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P60.HTM
aliases:
  - 3.1.1.6.p60
  - ccc-1783
  - ccc-1784
  - ccc-1785
  - II. The Formation of Conscience
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - graph/bible-ccc
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: one
ccc_chapter: one
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION ONE MAN'S VOCATION LIFE IN THE SPIRIT
		- CHAPTER ONE THE DIGNITY OF THE HUMAN PERSON
			- Article 6 MORAL CONSCIENCE
				- II. The Formation of Conscience

**[[3.1.1.6.p5z|Previous]]** - **[[3.1.1.6.p61|Next]]**

---

# II. The Formation of Conscience

1783 Conscience must be informed and moral judgment enlightened. A well-formed conscience is upright and truthful. It formulates its judgments according to reason, in conformity with the true good willed by the wisdom of the Creator. the education of conscience is indispensable for human beings who are subjected to negative influences and tempted by sin to prefer their own judgment and to reject authoritative teachings. ^ccc-1783

1784 The education of the conscience is a lifelong task. From the earliest years, it awakens the child to the knowledge and practice of the interior law recognized by conscience. Prudent education teaches virtue; it prevents or cures fear, selfishness and pride, resentment arising from guilt, and feelings of complacency, born of human weakness and faults. the education of the conscience guarantees freedom and engenders peace of heart. ^ccc-1784

1785 In the formation of conscience the Word of God is the light for our path,<sup>54</sup> we must assimilate it in faith and prayer and put it into practice. We must also examine our conscience before the Lord's Cross. We are assisted by the gifts of the Holy Spirit, aided by the witness or advice of others and guided by the authoritative teaching of the Church.<sup>55</sup> ^ccc-1785

---

**[54]** Cf. [[psalm-119#^psalm-119-105|Ps 119:105.]]**[55]** Cf. DH 14.
