---
type: catechism
title: III. Moral Life and Missionary Witness
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P76.HTM
aliases:
  - 3.1.3.3.p76
  - ccc-2044
  - ccc-2045
  - ccc-2046
  - III. Moral Life and Missionary Witness
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - graph/bible-ccc
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: one
ccc_chapter: three
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION ONE MAN'S VOCATION LIFE IN THE SPIRIT
		- CHAPTER THREE GOD'S SALVATION: LAW AND GRACE
			- Article 3 THE CHURCH, MOTHER AND TEACHER
				- III. Moral Life and Missionary Witness

**[[3.1.3.3.p75|Previous]]** - **[[3.1.3.3.p77|Next]]**

---

# III. Moral Life and Missionary Witness

2044 The fidelity of the baptized is a primordial condition for the proclamation of the Gospel and for the Church's mission in the world. In order that the message of salvation can show the power of its truth and radiance before men, it must be authenticated by the witness of the life of Christians. "The witness of a Christian life and good works done in a supernatural spirit have great power to draw men to the faith and to God."<sup>88</sup> ^ccc-2044

2045 Because they are members of the Body whose Head is Christ,<sup>89</sup> Christians contribute to building up the Church by the constancy of their convictions and their moral lives. the Church increases, grows, and develops through the holiness of her faithful, until "we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to mature manhood, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ."<sup>90</sup> ^ccc-2045

2046 By living with the mind of Christ, Christians hasten the coming of the Reign of God, "a kingdom of justice, love, and peace."<sup>91</sup> They do not, for all that, abandon their earthly tasks; faithful to their master, they fulfill them with uprightness, patience, and love. ^ccc-2046

---

**[88]** AA 6 # 2.**[89]** Cf. [[ephesians-01#^ephesians-01-22|Eph 1:22.]]**[90]** [[ephesians-04#^ephesians-04-13|Eph 4:13;]] cf. LG 39.**[91]** Roman Missal, Preface of Christ the King.