---
type: catechism
title: I. The Beatitudes
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P5I.HTM
aliases:
  - 3.1.1.2.p5i
  - ccc-1716
  - ccc-1717
  - I. The Beatitudes
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/beatitudes
  - term/peace
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: one
ccc_chapter: one
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION ONE MAN'S VOCATION LIFE IN THE SPIRIT
		- CHAPTER ONE THE DIGNITY OF THE HUMAN PERSON
			- Article 2 OUR VOCATION TO BEATITUDE
				- I. The Beatitudes

**[[3.1.1.1.p5h|Previous]]** - **[[3.1.1.2.p5j|Next]]**

---

**Article** **2**

**OUR VOCATION TO BEATITUDE**

# I. The Beatitudes

1716 The [[pursuits-sources/01-glossary/beatitudes|Beatitudes]] are at the heart of Jesus' preaching. They take up the promises made to the chosen people since [[abraham|Abraham]]. the Beatitudes fulfill the promises by ordering them no longer merely to the possession of a territory, but to the Kingdom of heaven: ^ccc-1716

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God.

Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are you when men revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account.

Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven.<sup>12</sup>

1717 The [[pursuits-sources/01-glossary/beatitudes|Beatitudes]] depict the countenance of Jesus Christ and portray his charity. They express the vocation of the faithful associated with the glory of his Passion and Resurrection; they shed light on the actions and attitudes characteristic of the Christian life; they are the paradoxical promises that sustain hope in the midst of tribulations; they proclaim the blessings and rewards already secured, however dimly, for Christ's disciples; they have begun in the lives of the Virgin Mary and all the saints. ^ccc-1717

---

**[12]** [[matthew-05|Mt 5]]:3-12.
