---
title: Article 1, Man The Image of God
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-02
type: catechism
publish: true
aliases:
  - 3.1.1.1.p5g
  - Article 1, Man the Image of God
  - Article 1, Man The Image of God
  - ccc-1701
  - ccc-1702
  - ccc-1703
  - ccc-1704
  - ccc-1705
  - ccc-1706
  - ccc-1707
  - ccc-1708
  - ccc-1709
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - term/devil-demon
  - term/evil
  - term/soul
  - vault-admin/graph/bible-ccc
author: Catholic Church
ccc_chapter: one
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: one
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P5G.HTM
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION ONE MAN'S VOCATION LIFE IN THE SPIRIT
		- CHAPTER ONE THE DIGNITY OF THE HUMAN PERSON
			- Article 1 MAN: THE IMAGE OF GOD

**[[3.1.1.0.p5f|Previous]]** - **[[3.1.1.1.p5h|Next]]**

---

# Article 1, Man the Image of God

1701 "Christ,... in the very revelation of the mystery of the Father and of his love, makes man fully manifest to himself and brings to light his exalted vocation."<sup>2</sup> It is in Christ, "the image of the invisible God,"<sup>3</sup> that man has been created "in the image and likeness" of the Creator. It is in Christ, Redeemer and Savior, that the divine image, disfigured in man by the first sin, has been restored to its original beauty and ennobled by the grace of God.<sup>4</sup> ^ccc-1701

1702 The divine image is present in every man. It shines forth in the communion of persons, in the likeness of the union of the divine persons among themselves (cf chapter two). ^ccc-1702

1703 Endowed with "a spiritual and immortal" soul,<sup>5</sup> The human person is "the only creature on earth that God has willed for its own sake."<sup>6</sup> From his conception, he is destined for eternal beatitude. ^ccc-1703

1704 The human person participates in the light and power of the divine Spirit. By his reason, he is capable of understanding the order of things established by the Creator. By free will, he is capable of directing himself toward his true good. He finds his perfection "in seeking and loving what is true and good."<sup>7</sup> ^ccc-1704

1705 By virtue of his soul and his spiritual powers of intellect and will, man is endowed with freedom, an "outstanding manifestation of the divine image."<sup>8</sup> ^ccc-1705

1706 By his reason, man recognizes the voice of God which urges him "to do what is good and avoid what is evil."<sup>9</sup> Everyone is obliged to follow this law, which makes itself heard in conscience and is fulfilled in the love of God and of neighbor. Living a moral life bears witness to the dignity of the person. ^ccc-1706

1707 "Man, enticed by the Evil One, abused his freedom at the very beginning of history."<sup>10</sup> He succumbed to temptation and did what was evil. He still desires the good, but his nature bears the wound of original sin. He is now inclined to evil and subject to error: ^ccc-1707

Man is divided in himself. As a result, the whole life of men, both individual and social, shows itself to be a struggle, and a dramatic one, between good and evil, between light and darkness.<sup>11</sup>

1708 By his Passion, Christ delivered us from Satan and from sin. He merited for us the new life in the Holy Spirit. His grace restores what sin had damaged in us. ^ccc-1708

1709 He who believes in Christ becomes a son of God. This filial adoption transforms him by giving him the ability to follow the example of Christ. It makes him capable of acting rightly and doing good. In union with his Savior, the disciple attains the perfection of charity which is holiness. Having matured in grace, the moral life blossoms into eternal life in the glory of heaven. ^ccc-1709

---

**[2]** GS 22.**[3]** [[colossians-01#^colossians-01-15|Col 1:15;]] cf. [[2-corinthians-04|2 Cor 4]]:4.**[4]** Cf. GS 22.**[5]** GS 14 # 2.**[6]** GS 24 # 3.**[7]** GS 15 # 2.**[8]** GS 17.**[9]** GS 16.**[10]** GS 13 # 1.**[11]** GS 13 # 2.