---
type: catechism
title: III. The Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Spirit
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P67.HTM
aliases:
  - 3.1.1.7.p67
  - ccc-1830
  - ccc-1831
  - ccc-1832
  - Iii. the Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Spirit
  - III. The Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Spirit
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/chastity
  - term/fear-of-the-lord
  - term/fruits-of-the-holy-spirit
  - term/gifts-of-the-holy-spirit
  - term/piety-gift-of
  - term/wisdom
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: one
ccc_chapter: one
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-04
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION ONE MAN'S VOCATION LIFE IN THE SPIRIT
		- CHAPTER ONE THE DIGNITY OF THE HUMAN PERSON
			- Article 7 THE VIRTUES
				- III. The Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Spirit

**[[3.1.1.7.p66|Previous]]** - **[[3.1.1.7.p68|Next]]**

---

# Iii. the Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Spirit

1830 The moral life of Christians is sustained by the gifts of the Holy Spirit. These are permanent dispositions which make man docile in following the promptings of the Holy Spirit. ^ccc-1830

1831 The seven gifts of the Holy Spirit are wisdom, understanding, counsel, fortitude, knowledge, piety, and fear of the Lord. They belong in their fullness to Christ, Son of David.<sup>109</sup> They complete and perfect the virtues of those who receive them. They make the faithful docile in readily obeying divine inspirations. ^ccc-1831

Let your good spirit lead me on a level path.<sup>110</sup>

For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God... If children, then heirs, heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ.<sup>111</sup>

1832 The fruits of the Spirit are perfections that the Holy Spirit forms in us as the first fruits of eternal glory. the tradition of the Church lists twelve of them: "charity, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, generosity, gentleness, faithfulness, modesty, self-control, chastity."<sup>112</sup> ^ccc-1832

---

**[109]** Cf. [[isaiah-11#^isaiah-11-1|Isa 11:1-2.]]**[110]** PS 143:10.**[111]** [[romans-08#^romans-08-14|Rom 8:14 17.]]**[112]** [[galatians-05#^galatians-05-22|Gal 5:22-23]](Vulg.).
