---
type: catechism
title: I. The Sabbath Day
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P7N.HTM
aliases:
  - 3.2.1.3.p7n
  - ccc-2168
  - ccc-2169
  - ccc-2170
  - ccc-2171
  - ccc-2172
  - ccc-2173
  - I. The Sabbath Day
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - graph/bible-ccc
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: two
ccc_chapter: one
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION TWO THE TEN COMMANDMENTS
		- CHAPTER ONE YOU SHALL LOVE THE LORD YOUR GOD WITH ALL YOUR HEART, AND WITH ALL YOUR SOUL, AND WITH ALL YOUR MIND
			- Article 3 THE THIRD COMMANDMENT
				- I. The Sabbath Day

**[[3.2.1.3.p7m|Previous]]** - **[[3.2.1.3.p7o|Next]]**

---

# I. The Sabbath Day

2168 The third commandment of the Decalogue recalls the holiness of the sabbath: "The seventh day is a sabbath of solemn rest, holy to the LORD."<sup>92</sup> ^ccc-2168

2169 In speaking of the sabbath Scripture recalls creation: "For in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested the seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day and hallowed it."<sup>93</sup> ^ccc-2169

2170 Scripture also reveals in the Lord's day a memorial of Israel's liberation from bondage in Egypt: "You shall remember that you were a servant in the land of Egypt, and the LORD your God brought you out thence with mighty hand and outstretched arm; therefore the LORD your God commanded you to keep the sabbath day."<sup>94</sup> ^ccc-2170

2171 God entrusted the sabbath to Israel to keep as a sign of the irrevocable covenant.<sup>95</sup> The sabbath is for the Lord, holy and set apart for the praise of God, his work of creation, and his saving actions on behalf of Israel. ^ccc-2171

2172 God's action is the model for human action. If God "rested and was refreshed" on the seventh day, man too ought to "rest" and should let others, especially the poor, "be refreshed."<sup>96</sup> The sabbath brings everyday work to a halt and provides a respite. It is a day of protest against the servitude of work and the worship of money.<sup>97</sup> ^ccc-2172

2173 The Gospel reports many incidents when Jesus was accused of violating the sabbath law. But Jesus never fails to respect the holiness of this day.<sup>98</sup> He gives this law its authentic and authoritative interpretation: "The sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath."<sup>99</sup> With compassion, Christ declares the sabbath for doing good rather than harm, for saving life rather than killing.<sup>100</sup> The sabbath is the day of the Lord of mercies and a day to honor God.<sup>101</sup> "The Son of Man is lord even of the sabbath."<sup>102</sup> ^ccc-2173

---

**[92]** [[exodus-31#^exodus-31-15|Ex 31:15.]]**[93]** [[exodus-20|Ex 20]]:11.**[94]** [[deuteronomy-05#^deuteronomy-05-15|Deut 5:15.]]**[95]** Cf. [[exodus-31#^exodus-31-16|Ex 31:16.]]**[96]** [[exodus-31#^exodus-31-17|Ex 31:17;]] cf. 23:12.**[97]** Cf. eh 13:15-22; [[2-chronicles-36#^2-chronicles-36-21|2 Chr 36:21.]]**[98]** Cf. [[mark-01|Mk 1]]:21; [[john-09#^john-09-16|Jn 9:16.]]**[99]** [[mark-02|Mk 2]]:27.**[100]** Cf. [[mark-03|Mk 3]]:4\[ETML:C/\].**[101]** Cf. [[matthew-12|Mt 12]]:5; [[john-07#^john-07-23|Jn 7:23.]]**[102]** [[mark-02|Mk 2]]:28.
