---
type: catechism
title: III. The Christian Name
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P7K.HTM
aliases:
  - 3.2.1.2.p7k
  - ccc-2156
  - ccc-2157
  - ccc-2158
  - ccc-2159
  - Iii. the Christian name
  - III. The Christian Name
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/sign-of-the-cross
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: two
ccc_chapter: one
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-04
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION TWO THE TEN COMMANDMENTS
		- CHAPTER ONE YOU SHALL LOVE THE LORD YOUR GOD WITH ALL YOUR HEART, AND WITH ALL YOUR SOUL, AND WITH ALL YOUR MIND
			- Article 2 THE SECOND COMMANDMENT
				- III. The Christian Name

**[[3.2.1.2.p7j|Previous]]** - **[[3.2.1.2.p7l|Next]]**

---

# Iii. the Christian Name

2156 The sacrament of Baptism is conferred "in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit."<sup>85</sup> In Baptism, the Lord's name sanctifies man, and the Christian receives his name in the Church. This can be the name of a saint, that is, of a disciple who has lived a life of exemplary fidelity to the Lord. the patron saint provides a model of charity; we are assured of his intercession. the "baptismal name" can also express a Christian mystery or Christian virtue. "Parents, sponsors, and the pastor are to see that a name is not given which is foreign to Christian sentiment."<sup>86</sup> ^ccc-2156

2157 The Christian begins his day, his prayers, and his activities with the Sign of the Cross: "in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. Amen." the baptized person dedicates the day to the glory of God and calls on the Savior's grace which lets him act in the Spirit as a child of the Father. the sign of the cross strengthens us in temptations and difficulties. ^ccc-2157

2158 God calls each one by name.<sup>87</sup> Everyone's name is sacred. the name is the icon of the person. It demands respect as a sign of the dignity of the one who bears it. ^ccc-2158

2159 The name one receives is a name for eternity. In the kingdom, the mysterious and unique character of each person marked with God's name will shine forth in splendor. "To him who conquers... I will give a white stone, with a new name written on the stone which no one knows except him who receives it."<sup>88</sup> "Then I looked, and Lo, on Mount Zion stood the Lamb, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand who had his name and his Father's name written on their foreheads."<sup>89</sup> ^ccc-2159

---

**[85]** [[matthew-28|Mt 28]]:19.**[86]** CIC, Can. 855.**[87]** Cf. [[isaiah-43#^isaiah-43-1|Isa 43:1;]] [[john-10#^john-10-3|Jn 10:3.]]**[88]** [[revelation-02|Rev 2]]:17.**[89]** [[revelation-14#^revelation-14-1|Rev 14:1.]]
