---
type: catechism
title: III. Poverty of Heart
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
aliases:
  - 3.2.2.10.p8w
  - ccc-2544
  - ccc-2545
  - ccc-2546
  - ccc-2547
  - Iii. Poverty of Heart
  - III. Poverty of Heart
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/humility
  - term/poverty
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: two
ccc_chapter: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-04
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION TWO THE TEN COMMANDMENTS
		- CHAPTER TWO YOU SHALL LOVE YOUR NEIGHBOR AS YOURSELF
			- Article 10 THE TENTH COMMANDMENT
				- III. Poverty of Heart

**[[3.2.2.10.p8v|Previous]]** - **[[3.2.2.10.p8x|Next]]**

---

# Iii. Poverty of Heart

2544 Jesus enjoins his disciples to prefer him to everything and everyone, and bids them "renounce all that \[they have\]" for his sake and that of the Gospel.<sup>334</sup> Shortly before his passion he gave them the example of the poor widow of Jerusalem who, out of her poverty, gave all that she had to live on.<sup>335</sup> The precept of detachment from riches is obligatory for entrance into the Kingdom of heaven. ^ccc-2544

2545 All Christ's faithful are to "direct their affections rightly, lest they be hindered in their pursuit of perfect charity by the use of worldly things and by an adherence to riches which is contrary to the spirit of evangelical poverty."<sup>336</sup> ^ccc-2545

2546 "Blessed are the poor in spirit."<sup>337</sup> The Beatitudes reveal an order of happiness and grace, of beauty and peace. Jesus celebrates the joy of the poor, to whom the Kingdom already belongs:<sup>338</sup> ^ccc-2546

The Word speaks of voluntary humility as "poverty in spirit"; the Apostle gives an example of God's poverty when he says: "For your sakes he became poor."<sup>339</sup>

2547 The Lord grieves over the rich, because they find their consolation in the abundance of goods.<sup>340</sup> "Let the proud seek and love earthly kingdoms, but blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven."<sup>341</sup> Abandonment to the providence of the Father in heaven frees us from anxiety about tomorrow.<sup>342</sup> Trust in God is a preparation for the blessedness of the poor. They shall see God. ^ccc-2547

---

**[334]** [[luke-14|Lk 14]]:33; cf. [[mark-08|Mk 8]]:35.**[335]** Cf. [[luke-21|Lk 21]]:4.**[336]** LG 42 # 3.**[337]** [[matthew-05|Mt 5]]:3\[ETML:C/\].**[338]** Cf. [[luke-06| [[luke-06|Lk 6]]:]]:20.**[339]** St. Gregory of Nyssa, De beatitudinibus 1: PG 44, 1200D; cf. [[2-corinthians-08|2 Cor 8]]:9.**[340]** [[luke-06| [[luke-06|Lk 6]]:]]:24.**[341]** St. Augustine, De serm. Dom. in monte 1, 1, 3: PL 34, 1232.**[342]** Cf. [[matthew-06|Mt 6]]:25-34.