---
type: catechism
title: Article 7. The Seventh Commandment – In Brief
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P8G.HTM
aliases:
  - 3.2.2.7. In Brief
  - 3.2.2.7.p8g
  - Article 7. The Seventh Commandment – In Brief
  - ccc-2450
  - ccc-2451
  - ccc-2452
  - ccc-2453
  - ccc-2454
  - ccc-2455
  - ccc-2456
  - ccc-2457
  - ccc-2458
  - ccc-2459
  - ccc-2460
  - ccc-2461
  - ccc-2462
  - ccc-2463
  - ccc-3
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - graph/bible-ccc
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: two
ccc_chapter: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
description: "Part Three: Life in Christ Section Two the Ten Commandments > Chapter Two You Shall Love Your Neighbor As Yourself > Article 7 the Seventh Commandment > – In Brief"
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION TWO THE TEN COMMANDMENTS
		- CHAPTER TWO YOU SHALL LOVE YOUR NEIGHBOR AS YOURSELF
			- Article 7 THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT
				- IN BRIEF

**[[3.2.2.7.p8f|Previous]]** - **[[3.2.2.8.p8h|Next]]**

---

# Article 7. The Seventh Commandment – In Brief

^ccc-3

*2450 "You shall not steal" ([[exodus-20|Ex 20]]:15; Deut 5:19). "Neither thieves, nor the greedy, nor robbers will inherit the kingdom of God" ([[1-corinthians-06|1 Cor 6]]:10).* ^ccc-2450

*2451 The seventh commandment enjoins the practice of justice and charity in the administration of earthly goods and the fruits of men's labor.* ^ccc-2451

*2452 The goods of creation are destined for the entire human race. the right to private property does not abolish the universal destination of goods.* ^ccc-2452

*2453 The seventh commandment forbids theft. Theft is the usurpation of another's goods against the reasonable will of the owner.* ^ccc-2453

*2454 Every manner of taking and using another's property unjustly is contrary to the seventh commandment. the injustice committed requires reparation. Commutative justice requires the restitution of stolen goods.* ^ccc-2454

*2455 The moral law forbids acts which, for commercial or totalitarian purposes, lead to the enslavement of human beings, or to their being bought, sold or exchanged like merchandise.* ^ccc-2455

*2456 The dominion granted by the Creator over the mineral, vegetable, and animal resources of the universe cannot be separated from respect for moral obligations, including those toward generations to come.* ^ccc-2456

*2457 Animals are entrusted to man's stewardship; he must show them kindness. They may be used to serve the just satisfaction of man's needs.* ^ccc-2457

*2458 The Church makes a judgment about economic and social matters when the fundamental rights of the person or the salvation of souls requires \*. She is concerned with the temporal common good of men because they are ordered to the sovereign Good, their ultimate end.* ^ccc-2458

*2459 Man is himself the author, center, and goal of all economic and social life. the decisive point of the social question is that goods created by God for everyone should in fact reach everyone in accordance with justice and with the help of charity.* ^ccc-2459

*2460 The primordial value of labor stems from man himself, its author and beneficiary. By means of his labor man participates in the work of creation. Work united to Christ can be redemptive.* ^ccc-2460

*2461 True development concerns the whole man. It is concerned with increasing each person's ability to respond to his vocation and hence to God's call (cf CA 29).* ^ccc-2461

*2462 Giving alms to the poor is a witness to fraternal charity: it is also a work of justice pleasing to God.* ^ccc-2462

*2463 How can we not recognize Lazarus, the hungry beggar in the parable (cf [[luke-17|Lk 17]]:19-31), in the multitude of human beings without bread, a roof or a place to stay? How can we fail to hear Jesus: "As you did it not to one of the least of these, you did it not to me" ([[matthew-25|Mt 25]]:45)?* ^ccc-2463
