---
type: catechism
title: IV. You Shall Not Make for Yourself a Graven Image
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P7F.HTM
aliases:
  - 3.2.1.1.p7f
  - ccc-2129
  - ccc-2130
  - ccc-2131
  - ccc-2132
  - IV. You Shall Not Make for Yourself a Graven Image
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-3
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/iconoclasm
  - term/veneration-of-saints
ccc_part: three
ccc_section: two
ccc_chapter: one
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART THREE: LIFE IN CHRIST
	- SECTION TWO THE TEN COMMANDMENTS
		- CHAPTER ONE YOU SHALL LOVE THE LORD YOUR GOD WITH ALL YOUR HEART, AND WITH ALL YOUR SOUL, AND WITH ALL YOUR MIND
			- Article 1 THE FIRST COMMANDMENT
				- IV. "You Shall Not Make For Yourself a Graven Image..."

**[[3.2.1.1.p7e|Previous]]** - **[[3.2.1.1.p7g|Next]]**

---

# IV. You Shall Not Make for Yourself a Graven Image

2129 The divine injunction included the prohibition of every representation of God by the hand of man. Deuteronomy explains: "Since you saw no form on the day that the Lord spoke to you at Horeb out of the midst of the fire, beware lest you act corruptly by making a graven image for yourselves, in the form of any figure...."<sup>66</sup> It is the absolutely transcendent God who revealed himself to Israel. "He is the all," but at the same time "he is greater than all his works."<sup>67</sup> He is "the author of beauty."<sup>68</sup> ^ccc-2129

2130 Nevertheless, already in the Old Testament, God ordained or permitted the making of images that pointed symbolically toward salvation by the incarnate Word: so it was with the bronze serpent, the ark of the covenant, and the cherubim.<sup>69</sup> ^ccc-2130

2131 Basing itself on the mystery of the incarnate Word, the seventh ecumenical council at Nicaea (787) justified against the iconoclasts the veneration of icons - of Christ, but also of the Mother of God, the angels, and all the saints. By becoming incarnate, the Son of God introduced a new "economy" of images. ^ccc-2131

2132 The Christian veneration of images is not contrary to the first commandment which proscribes idols. Indeed, "the honor rendered to an image passes to its prototype," and "whoever venerates an image venerates the person portrayed in it."<sup>70</sup> The honor paid to sacred images is a "respectful veneration," not the [[adoration]] due to God alone: ^ccc-2132

Religious worship is not directed to images in themselves, considered as mere things, but under their distinctive aspect as images leading us on to God incarnate. the movement toward the image does not terminate in it as image, but tends toward that whose image it is.<sup>71</sup>

---

**[66]** [[deuteronomy-04#^deuteronomy-04-15|Deut 4:15-16.]]**[67]** [[sirach-43#^sirach-43-27|Sir 43:27-28.]]**[68]** [[wisdom-13#^wisdom-13-3|Wis 13:3.]]**[69]** Cf. [[numbers-21|Num 21]]:4-9; [[wisdom-16#^wisdom-16-5|Wis 16:5-14;]] [[john-03#^john-03-14|Jn 3:14-15;]] [[exodus-25|Ex 25]]:10-22; [[1-kings-06#^1-kings-06-23|1 Kings 6:23-28;]] 7:23-26.**[70]** St. Basil, De Spiritu Sancto 18, 45: PG 32, 149C; Council of Nicaea II: DS 601; cf. Council of Trent: DS 1821-1825; Vatican Council II: SC 126; LG 67.**[71]** St. Thomas Aquinas, STh II-II, 81, 3 ad 3.
