---
type: book
title: Chapter XL – The Life of St. Teresa of Jesus (CCEL Edition)
author: Saint Teresa of Ávila
aliases:
  - Chapter XL. Visions, Revelations, and Locutions – The Life of St. Teresa of Jesus (CCEL Edition)
tags:
  - author/saint-teresa-of-avila
  - book/life
  - type/book
created: 2026-04-08
modified: 2026-04-09
publish: false
description: Chapter XL. Visions, Revelations, and Locutions
---

← [[chapter-xxxix-tj-life-ccel|Chapter XXXIX]] | [[tj-life-ccel-toc|Table of Contents]] | [[index-tj-life-cceles|Indexes]] →

# Chapter XL. Visions, Revelations, and Locutions

1. One day, in prayer, the sweetness of which was so great that, knowing how unworthy I was of so great a blessing, I began to think how much I had deserved to be in that place which I had seen prepared for me in hell,—for, as I said before,[603](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p1.2) I never forget the way I saw myself there,—as I was thinking of this, my soul began to be more and more on fire, and I was carried away in spirit in a way I cannot describe. It seemed to me as if I had been absorbed in, and filled with, that grandeur of God which, on another occasion, I had felt.[604](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p2.3) In that majesty it was given me to understand one truth, which is the fulness of all truth, but I cannot tell how, for I saw nothing. It was said to me, I saw not by whom, but I knew well enough it was the Truth Itself: "This I am doing to thee is not a slight matter; it is one of those things for which thou owest Me much; for all the evil in the world comes from ignorance of the truths of the holy writings in their clear simplicity, of which not one iota shall pass away."[605](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p3.3) I thought that I had always believed this, and that all the faithful also believed it. Then he said,: "Ah, My daughter, they are few who love 386Me in truth; for if men loved Me, I should not hide My secrets from them. Knowest thou what it is to love Me in truth? It is to admit everything to be a lie which is not pleasing unto Me. Now thou dost not understand it, but thou shalt understand it clearly hereafter, in the profit it will be to thy soul." 
2. Our Lord be praised, so I found it; for after this vision I look upon everything which does not tend to the service of God as vanity and lies. I cannot tell how much I am convinced of this, nor how sorry I am for those whom I see living in darkness, not knowing the truth. I derived other great blessings also from this, some of which I will here speak of, others I cannot describe. 
3. Our Lord at the same time uttered a special word of most exceeding graciousness. I know not how it was done, for I saw nothing; but I was filled, in a way which also I cannot describe, with exceeding strength and earnestness of purpose to observe with all my might everything contained in the divine writings. I thought that I could rise above every possible hindrance put in my way. 
4. Of this divine truth, which was put before me I know not how, there remains imprinted within me a truth—I cannot give it a name—which fills me with a new reverence for God; it gives me a notion of His Majesty and power in a way which I cannot explain. I can understand that it is something very high. I had a very great desire never to speak of anything but of those deep truths which far surpass all that is spoken of here in the world,—and so the living in it began to be painful to me. 
5. The vision left me in great tenderness, joy, and humility. It seemed to me, though I knew not how, that our Lord now gave me great things; and I had no suspicion whatever of any illusion. I saw nothing; but I understood how great a blessing it is to make no account of anything which does not lead us nearer 387unto God. I also understood what it is for a soul to be walking in the truth, in the presence of the Truth itself. What I understood is this: that our Lord gave me to understand that He is Himself the very Truth. 
6. All this I am speaking of I learnt at times by means of words uttered; at other times I learnt some things without the help of words, and that more clearly than those other things which were told me in words. I understood exceedingly deep truths concerning the Truth, more than I could have done through the teaching of many learned men. It seems to me that learned men never could have thus impressed upon me, nor so clearly explained to me, the vanity of this world. 
7. The Truth of which I am speaking, and which I was given to see, is Truth Itself, in Itself. It has neither beginning nor end. All other truths depend on this Truth, as all other loves depend on this love, and all other grandeurs on this grandeur. I understood it all, notwithstanding that my words are obscure in comparison with that distinctness with which it pleased our Lord to show it to me. What think you must be the power of His Majesty, seeing that in so short a time it leaves so great a blessing and such an impression on the soul? O Grandeur! Majesty of mine! what is it Thou art doing, O my Lord Almighty! Consider who it is to whom Thou givest blessings so great! Dost Thou not remember that this my soul has been an abyss of lies and a sea of vanities, and all my fault? Though Thou hadst given me a natural hatred of lying yet I did involve myself in many lying ways. How is this, O my God? how can it be that mercies and graces so great should fall to the lot of one who has so ill deserved them at Thy hands? 
8. Once, when I was with the whole community reciting the Office, my soul became suddenly recollected, and seemed to me all bright as a mirror, clear behind, sideways, upwards, and downwards; and in the centre 388of it I saw Christ our Lord, as I usually see Him. It seemed to me that I saw Him distinctly in every part of my soul, as in a mirror, and at the same time the mirror was all sculptured—I cannot explain it—in our Lord Himself by a most loving communication which I can never describe. I know that this vision was a great blessing to me, and is still whenever I remember it, particularly after Communion. 
9. I understood by it, that, when a soul is in mortal sin, this mirror becomes clouded with a thick vapour, and utterly obscured, so that our Lord is neither visible nor present, though He is always present in the conservation of its being. In heretics, the mirror is, as it were, broken in pieces, and that is worse than being dimmed. There is a very great difference between seeing this and describing it, for it can hardly be explained. But it has done me great good; it has also made me very sorry on account of those times when I dimmed the lustre of my soul by my sins, so that I could not see our Lord. 
10. This vision seems to me very profitable to recollected persons, to teach them to look upon our Lord as being in the innermost part of their soul. It is a method of looking upon Him which penetrates us more thoroughly, and is much more fruitful, than that of looking upon Him as external to us, as I have said elsewhere,[606](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p13.2) and as it is laid down in books on prayer, where they speak of where we are to seek God. The glorious St. Augustin,[607](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p14.4) in particular, says so, when he says that neither in the streets of the city, nor in pleasures, nor in any place whatever where he sought Him, did he find Him as he found Him within himself. This is clearly the best way; we need not go up to heaven, nor any further than our own selves, for that 389would only distress the spirit and distract the soul, and bring but little fruit. 
11. I should like to point out one result of a deep trance; it may be that some are aware of it. When the time is over during which the soul was in union, wherein all its powers were wholly absorbed,—it lasts, as I have said,[608](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p16.2) but a moment,—the soul continues still to be recollected, unable to recover itself even in outward things; for the two powers—the memory and the understanding—are, as it were, in a frenzy, extremely disordered. This, I say, happens occasionally, particularly in the beginnings. I am thinking whether it does not result from this: that our natural weakness cannot endure the vehemence of the spirit, which is so great, and that the imagination is enfeebled. I know it to be so with some. I think it best for these to force themselves to give up prayer at that time, and resume it afterwards, when they may recover what they have lost, and not do everything at once, for in that case much harm might come of it. I know this by experience, as well as the necessity of considering what our health can bear. 
12. Experience is necessary throughout, so also is a spiritual director; for when the soul has reached this point, there are many matters which must be referred to the director. If, after seeking such a one, the soul cannot find him, our Lord will not fail that soul, seeing that He has not failed me, who am what I am: They are not many, I believe, who know by experience so many things, and without experience it is useless to treat a soul at all, for nothing will come of it, save only trouble and distress. But our Lord will take this also into account, and for that reason it is always best to refer the matter to the director. I have already more than once said this,[609](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p18.2) and even all I am saying now, only I do not distinctly remember it; but I do see that it is 390of great importance, particularly to women, that they should go to their confessor, and that he should be a man of experience herein. There are many more women than men to whom our Lord gives these graces; I have heard the holy friar Peter of Alcantara say so, and, indeed, I know it myself. He used to say that women made greater progress in this way than men did; and he gave excellent reasons for his opinion, all in favour of women; but there is no necessity for repeating them here. 
13. Once, when in prayer, I had a vision, for a moment,—I saw nothing distinctly, but the vision was most clear,—how all things are seen in God and how all things are comprehended in Him. I cannot in any way explain it, but the vision remains most deeply impressed on my soul, and is one of those grand graces which our Lord wrought in me, and one of those which put me to the greatest shame and confusion whenever I call my sins to remembrance. I believe, if it had pleased our Lord that I had seen this at an earlier time, or if they saw it who sin against Him, we should have neither the heart nor the daring to do so. I had the vision, I repeat it, but I cannot say that I saw anything; however, I must have seen something, seeing that I explain it by an illustration, only it must have been in a way so subtile and delicate that the understanding is unable to reach it, or I am so ignorant in all that relates to these visions, which seem to be not imaginary. In some of these visions there must be something imaginary, only, as the powers of the soul are then in a trance, they are not able afterwards to retain the forms, as our Lord showed them to it then, and as He would have it rejoice in them. 
14. Let us suppose the Godhead to be a most brilliant diamond, much larger than the whole world, or a mirror like that to which I compared the soul in a former vision,[610](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p21.2) only in a way so high that I cannot 391possibly describe it; and that all our actions are seen in that diamond, which is of such dimensions as to include everything, because nothing can be beyond it. It was a fearful thing for me to see, in so short a time, so many things together in that brilliant diamond, and a most piteous thing too, whenever I think of it, to see such foul things as my sins present in the pure brilliancy of that light. 
15. So it is, whenever I remember it, I do not know how to bear it, and I was then so ashamed of myself that I knew not where to hide myself. Oh, that some one could make this plain to those who commit most foul and filthy sins, that they may remember their sins are not secret, and that God most justly resents them, seeing that they are wrought in the very presence of His Majesty, and that we are demeaning ourselves so irreverently before Him! I saw, too, how completely hell is deserved for only one mortal sin, and how impossible it is to understand the exceeding great wickedness of committing it in the sight of majesty so great, and how abhorrent to His nature such actions are. In this we see more and more of His mercifulness, who, though we all know His hatred of sin, yet suffers us to live. 
16. The vision made me also reflect, that if one such vision as this fills the souls with such awe, what will it be in the day of judgment, when His Majesty will appear distinctly, and when we too shall look on the sins we have committed! O my God, I have been, oh, how blind! I have often been amazed at what I have written; and you, my father, be you not amazed at anything, but that I am still living,—I, who see such things, and know myself to be what I am. Blessed for ever be He who has borne with me so long! 
17. Once, in prayer, with much recollection, sweetness, and repose, I saw myself, as it seemed to me, surrounded by angels, and was close unto God. I began to intercede with His Majesty on behalf of the 392church. I was given to understand the great services which a particular Order would render in the latter days, and the courage with which its members would maintain the faith. 
18. I was praying before the most Holy Sacrament one day; I had a vision of a Saint, whose Order was in some degree fallen. In his hands he held a large book, which he opened, and then told me to read certain words, written in large and very legible letters; they were to this effect: "In times to come this Order will flourish; it will have many martyrs."[611](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p26.2)
19. On another occasion, when I was at Matins in choir, six or seven persons, who seemed to me to be of this Order, appeared and stood before me with swords in their hands. The meaning of that, as I think, is that they are to be defenders of the faith; for at another time, when I was in prayer, I fell into a trance, and stood in spirit on a wide plain, where many persons were fighting; and the members of this Order were fighting with great zeal. Their faces were beautiful, and as it were on fire. Many they laid low on the ground defeated, others they killed. It seemed to me to be a battle with heretics. 
20. I have seen this glorious Saint occasionally, and he has told me certain things, and thanked me for praying for his Order, and he has promised to pray for me to our Lord. I do not say which Orders these 393are,—our Lord, if it so pleased Him, could make them known,—lest the others should be aggrieved. Let every Order, or every member of them by himself, labour, that by his means our Lord would so bless his own Order that it may serve Him in the present grave necessities of His Church. Blessed are they whose lives are so spent. 
21. I was once asked by a person to pray God to let him know whether his acceptance of a bishopric would be for the service of God. After Communion our Lord said to me: "When he shall have clearly and really understood that true dominion consists in possessing nothing, he may then accept it." I understood by this that he who is to be in dignity must be very far from wishing or desiring it, or at least he must not seek it. 
22. These and many other graces our Lord has given, and is giving continually, to me a sinner. I do not think it is necessary to speak of them, because the state of my soul can be ascertained from what I have written; so also can the spirit which our Lord has given me. May He be blessed for ever, who has been so mindful of me! 
23. Our Lord said to me once, consoling me, that I was not to distress myself,—this He said most lovingly,—because in this life we could not continue in the same state.[612](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p32.2) At one time I should be fervent, at another not; now disquieted, and again at peace, and tempted; but I must hope in Him, and fear not. 
24. I was one day thinking whether it was a want of detachment in me to take pleasure in the company of those who had the care of my soul, and to have an affection for them, and to comfort myself with those whom I see to be very great servants of God.[613](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p34.2) Our Lord said to me: "It is not a virtue in a sick man to abstain from thanking and loving the physician who 394seems to restore him to health when he is in danger of death. What should I have done without these persons? The conversation of good people was never hurtful; my words should always be weighed, and holy; and I was not to cease my relations with them, for they would do me good rather than harm." 
25. This was a great comfort to me, because, now and then, I wished to abstain from converse with all people; for it seemed to me that I was attached to them. Always, in all things, did our Lord console me, even to the showing me how I was to treat those who were weak, and some other people also. Never did He cease to take care of me. I am sometimes distressed to see how little I do in His service, and how I am forced to spend time in taking care of a body so weak and worthless as mine is, more than I wish. 
26. I was in prayer one night, when it was time to go to sleep. I was in very great pain, and my usual sickness was coming on.[614](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p37.2) I saw myself so great a slave to myself, and, on the other hand, the spirit asked for time for itself. I was so much distressed that I began to weep exceedingly, and to be very sorry. This has happened to me not once only, but, as I am saying, very often; and it seems to make me weary of myself, so that at the time I hold myself literally in abhorrence. Habitually, however, I know that I do not hate myself, and I never fail to take that which I see to be necessary for me. May our Lord grant that I do not take more than is necessary!—I am afraid I do. 
27. When I was thus distressed, our Lord appeared unto me. He comforted me greatly, and told me I must do this for His love, and bear it; my life was necessary now. And so, I believe, I have never known real pain since I resolved to serve my Lord and my Consoler with all my strength; for though he would leave me to suffer a little, yet He would console 395me in such a way that I am doing nothing when I long for troubles. And it seems to me there is nothing worth living for but this, and suffering is what I most heartily pray to God for. I say to Him sometimes, with my whole heart: "O Lord, either to die or to suffer! I ask of Thee nothing else for myself." It is a comfort to me to hear the clock strike, because I seem to have come a little nearer to the vision of God, in that another hour of my life has passed away. 
28. At other times I am in such a state that I do not feel that I am living, nor yet do I desire to die but I am lukewarm, and darkness surrounds me on every side, as I said before;[615](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p40.2) for I am very often in great trouble. It pleased our Lord that the graces He wrought in me should be published abroad,[616](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p41.3) as He told me some years ago they should be. It was a great pain to me, and I have borne much on that account even to this day, as you, my father, know, because every man explains them in his own sense. But my comfort herein is that it is not my fault that they are become known, for I was extremely cautious never to speak of them but to my confessors, or to persons who I knew had heard of them from them. I was silent, however, not out of humility, but because, as I said before,[617](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p42.3) it gave me great pain to speak of them even to my confessors. 
29. Now, however,—to God be the glory!—though many speak against me, but out of a zeal for goodness, and though some are afraid to speak to me, and even to hear my confession, and though others have much to say about me, because I see that our Lord willed by this means to provide help for many souls,—and also because I see clearly and keep in mind how much He would suffer, if only for the gaining of one,—I do not care about it at all. 
30. I know not why it is so, but perhaps the reason may in some measure be that His Majesty has placed 396me in this corner out of the way, where the enclosure is so strict, and where I am as one that is dead. I thought that no one would remember me, but I am not so much forgotten as I wish I was, for I am forced to speak to some people. But as I am in a house where none may see me, it seems as if our Lord had been pleased to bring me to a haven, which I trust in His Majesty will be secure. Now that I am out of the world, with companions holy and few in number, I look down on the world as from a great height, and care very little what people say or know about me. I think much more of one soul's advancement, even if it were but slight, than of all that people may say of me; and since I am settled here it has pleased our Lord that all my desires tend to this. 
31. He has made my life to me now a kind of sleep; for almost always what I see seems to me to be seen as in a dream, nor have I any great sense either of pleasure or of pain. If matters occur which may occasion either, the sense of it passes away so quickly that it astonishes me, and leaves an impression as if I had been dreaming,—and this is the simple truth; for if I wished afterwards to delight in that pleasure, or be sorry over that pain, it is not in my power to do so: just as a sensible person feels neither pain nor pleasure in the memory of a dream that is past; for now our Lord has roused my soul out of that state which, because I was not mortified nor dead to the things of this world, made me feel as I did, and His Majesty does not wish me to become blind again. 
32. This is the way I live now, my lord and father; do you, my father, pray to God that He would take me to Himself, or enable me to serve Him. May it please His Majesty that what I have written may be of some use to you, my father! I have so little time,[618](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p47.2) and therefore my trouble has been great in writing; but it will be a blessed trouble if I have succeeded in 397saying anything that will cause one single act of praise to our Lord. If that were the case, I should look upon myself as sufficiently rewarded, even if you, my father, burnt at once what I have written. I would rather it were not burnt before those three saw it, whom you, my father, know of, because they are, and have been, my confessors; for if it be bad, it is right they should lose the good opinion they have of me; and if it be good, they are good and learned men, and I know they will recognise its source, and give praise to Him who hath spoken through me. 
33. May His Majesty ever be your protector, and make you so great a saint that your spirit and light may show the way to me a miserable creature, so wanting in humility and so bold as to have ventured to write on subjects so high! May our Lord grant I have not fallen into any errors in the matter, for I had the intention and the desire to be accurate and obedient, and also that through me He might, in some measure, have glory,—because that is what I have been praying for these many years; and as my good works are inefficient for that end, I have ventured to put in order this my disordered life. Still, I have not wasted more time, nor given it more attention, than was necessary for writing it; yet I have put down all that has happened to me with all the simplicity and sincerity possible. 
34. May our Lord, who is all-powerful, grant—and He can if He will—that I may attain to the doing of His will in all things! May He never suffer this soul to be lost, which He so often, in so many ways, and by so many means, has rescued from hell and drawn unto Himself! Amen. 

398

I.H.S.

The Holy Spirit be ever with you, my father.[619](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p52.1) Amen. It would not be anything improper if I were to magnify my labour in writing this, to oblige you to be very careful to recommend me to our Lord; for indeed I may well do so, considering what I have gone through in giving this account of myself, and in retracing my manifold wretchedness. But, still, I can say with truth that I felt it more difficult to speak of the graces which I have received from our Lord than to speak of my offences against His Majesty. You, my father, commanded me to write at length; that is what I have done, on condition that you will do what you promised, namely, destroy everything in it that has the appearance of being wrong. I had not yet read it through after I had written it, when your reverence sent for it. Some things in it may not be very clearly explained, and there may be some repetitions; for the time I could give to it was so short, that I could not stop to see what I was writing. I entreat your reverence to correct it and have it copied, if it is to be sent on to the Father-Master, Avila,[620](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p53.2) for perhaps some one may recognise the handwriting. I wish very much you would order it so that he might see it, for I began to write it with a view to that I shall be greatly comforted if he shall think that I am on a safe road, now that, so far as it concerns me, there is nothing more to be done. 

Your reverence will do in all things that which to you shall seem good, and you will look upon yourself as under an obligation to take care of one who trusts her soul to your keeping. I will pray for the soul of your reverence to our Lord, so long as I live. 

399

You will, therefore, be diligent in His service, in order that you may be able to help me; for your reverence will see by what I have written how profitable it is to give oneself, as your reverence has begun to do, wholly unto Him who gives Himself to us so utterly without measure. 

Blessed be His Majesty for ever! I hope of His mercy we shall see one another one day, when we, your reverence and myself, shall see more clearly the great mercies He has shown us, and when we shall praise Him for ever and ever. Amen. This book was finished in June, 1562. 

"This date refers to the first account which the holy Mother Teresa of Jesus wrote of her life; it was not then divided into chapters. Afterwards she made this copy, and inserted in it many things which had taken place subsequent to this date, such as the foundation of the monastery of St. Joseph of Avila, as in p. 169.[621](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fnf_viii.xli-p58.3)—Fray Do Bañes." 

---

[603](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p1.2)   [Ch. xxxii. § 1](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xxxiii.html#viii.xxxiii-p1.1).

[604](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p2.3)   [Ch. xxviii. § 14](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xxix.html#viii.xxix-p21.1).

[605](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p3.3)   St. [Matt. v. 18](https://ccel.org/study/Matt_5:18-5:18): "Iota unum aut unus apex non præteribit a lege."

[606](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p13.2)   [Ch. iv. § 10](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.v.html#viii.v-p21.1).

[607](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p14.4)   "Ecce quantum spatiatus sum in memoria mea quærens Te, Domine; et non Te inveni extra eam. . . . Ex quo didici Te, manes in memoria mea, et illic Te invenio cum reminiscor Tui et delector in Te" (Confess. x. 24). See Inner Fortress, Sixth Mansion, ch. iv.

[608](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p16.2)   [Ch. xx. § 26](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xxi.html#viii.xxi-p49.1).

[609](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p18.2)   [Ch. xxv. § 18](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xxvi.html#viii.xxvi-p29.1), [ch. xxvi. § 4](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xxvii.html#viii.xxvii-p8.1). See St. John of the Cross, [Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xxii](https://ccel.org/ccel/john_cross/ascent.v.xxii.html).

[610](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p21.2)   [§ 8](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#viii.xli-p11.1).

[611](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p26.2)   Yepez says that the Order here spoken of is the Carmelite, and Ribera understands the Saint to refer to that of St. Dominic. The Bollandists, n. 1638–1646, on the whole, prefer the authority of Ribera to that of Yepez and give good reasons for their preference, setting aside as insufficient the testimony of Fray Luis of the Assumption, who says he heard himself from the Venerable Anne of St. Bartholomew that the Order in question is the Order of our Lady of Mount Carmel. Don Vicente, the Spanish editor, rejects the opinion of Ribera, on the ground that it could not have been truly said of the Dominicans in the sixteenth century that the Order was in "some degree fallen," for it was in a most flourishing state. He therefore was inclined to believe that the Saint referred to the Augustinians or to the Franciscans. But, after he had printed this part of his book, he discovered among the MSS. in the public library of Madrid a letter of Anne of St. Bartholomew, addressed to Fray Luis of the Assumption, in which the saintly companion of St. Teresa says that the "Order was ours." Don Vicente has published the letter in the Appendix, p. 566.

[612](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p32.2)   [Job xiv. 2](https://ccel.org/study/Job_14:2-14:2): "Nunquam in eodem statu permanet."

[613](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p34.2)   See [ch. xxxvii. §§ 4](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xxxviii.html#viii.xxxviii-p7.1), [6](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xxxviii.html#viii.xxxviii-p10.1).

[614](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p37.2)   See [ch. vii. § 18](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.viii.html#viii.viii-p28.1).

[615](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p40.2)   [Ch. xxx. § 10](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xxxi.html#viii.xxxi-p19.1).

[616](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p41.3)   [Ch. xxxi. §§ 16, 17](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xxxii.html#viii.xxxii-p20.1).

[617](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p42.3)   [Ch. xxviii. § 6](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xxix.html#viii.xxix-p11.1).

[618](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p47.2)   See [ch. xiv. § 12](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xv.html#viii.xv-p16.1).

[619](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p52.1)   This letter, which seems to have accompanied the "Life," is printed among the other letters of the Saint, and is addressed to her confessor, the Dominican friar, Pedro Ibañez. It is the fifteenth letter in the first volume of the edition of Madrid; but it is not dated there.

[620](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p53.2)   Juan de Avila, commonly called the Apostle of Andalusia.

[621](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xli.html#fna_viii.xli-p58.3)   _I.e._ of the MS. See [p. 337](https://ccel.org/ccel/teresa/life/life.viii.xxxvii.html#viii.xxxvii-p38.1) of this translation.