---
type: essay
title: The Order of Melchizedek
author: Scott Hahn; Curtis Mitch
source: The Ignatius Catholic Study Bible – The New Testament Revised Standard Version Second Catholic Edition
aliases:
  - The Order of Melchizedek
  - the-order-of-melchizedek
tags:
  - bible/new-testament
  - type/essay
created: 2026-04-09
modified: 2026-04-09
publish: true
description: The Order of Melchizedek
---

# The Order of Melchizedek

**O**NLY four verses in the OT mention the royal priest Melchizedek (Gen 14:18-20; Ps 110:4). Given such minimal attention, one might think him an insignificant figure in the great drama of biblical history. Yet, in the Letter to the Hebrews, the priesthood of Melchizedek looms large as an anticipation of the priesthood of Jesus Christ. Some investigation into the background of this mysterious priest-king is called for if we are to understand and appreciate the Melchizedek argument in Hebrews.

MELCHIZEDEK THE PRIEST

> Let us begin with some basic facts. Melchizedek is the first person in > Scripture who is explicitly called a \"priest\" (Gen 14:18). Indeed, > he is the only figure in Genesis who is identified as a priest of > \"God Most High\", the same God that Abraham knows as \"the LORD\" who > made \"heaven and earth\" (Gen 14:22). The only others to bear the > title \"priest\" in Genesis are pagan clerics who served the idol gods > of Egypt (Gen 41:45, 50; 46:20; 47:22, 26). Secondly, Melchizedek is > identified as the king of \"Salem\" (Gen 14:18). Psalm 76:2 identifies > this city as Zion, i.e., Jerusalem, as does a long stream of Jewish > tradition. This is the holy city that would later become the spiritual > center of Israelite religion and the political capital of the Davidic > kings. Thirdly, Melchizedek ministers to Abraham as a priest, not only > by blessing him (Gen 14:19), but also by bringing forth \"bread and > wine\" (Gen 14:18). These are probably the elements of a thank > offering made to God Most High in gratitude for a successful mission, > and as such they would constitute a communion sacrifice to be consumed > by the priest and participants alike (cf. Lev 7:12-15). Abraham > reciprocates these actions by giving a tithe of his spoils to > Melchizedek (Gen 14:20), suggesting that a priestly and spiritual > service has indeed been performed for the patriarch and his company > (cf. Num 18:21).

MELCHIZEDEK\'S PRIESTLY ORDER

> The Letter to the Hebrews finds theological significance, not only in > the person of Melchizedek as an individual, but also in his > priesthood. This is why the phrase \"the order of Melchizedek\" > appears five times in the span of three chapters (Heb 5:6, > 10; > 6:20; > 7:11, > 17). The expression itself is > taken from Psalm 110, where the Lord swears an oath of ordination to > the Davidic Messiah, making the *king* at his right hand (Ps > 110:1) a *priest* after the order of Melchizedek (Ps 110:4). > The statement is striking, since for well over a thousand years, > Israel knew only the Levitical priesthood of Aaron and his descendants > established by the Mosaic covenant (Ex 40:12-15). No other priesthood > was acknowledged by the Law or permitted to officiate on behalf of the > covenant people (Num 17:1-13; 18:1-7). So what is this \"order\" > linked with Melchizedek?

> Genesis implies that the order of Melchizedek is the patriarchal > order of priesthood that functioned for many centuries before the > ordination of Aaron and his sons took place at Mount Sinai (Lev > 8:1-36). In other words, it is the original, pre-Levitical form of the > priesthood that was exercised during the long stretch of pre-Mosaic > history. This was the age of natural religion, an era when priestly > authority was rooted in the authority structure of the family. In > these ancient times, the father of the family conducted public rites > of worship, and his sons became his successors in the ministry. In > particular, the first-born son, by the natural right of primogeniture, > was the primary heir who stood to receive the full measure of his > father\'s priestly and ruling responsibility. This is what we see > throughout Genesis, where the Patriarchs---not a professional class of > clerical priests---exercised spiritual leadership by building altars > (Gen 12:7-8; 13:18), calling upon the Lord in prayer (Gen 21:33; > 26:25), con--- secrating natural landmarks (Gen 28:18-22), pouring out > libations (Gen 35:14), and offering sacrifice on behalf of the family > (Gen 8:20; 46:1; Job 1:5).

MELCHIZEDEK\'S IDENTITY

> Such is the historical context in which Melchizedek exercised his > priesthood. Being a patriarch, he possessed ruling authority as a > \"king\" as well as religious authority as a \"priest\" (Gen 14:18). > Beyond this, it is interesting to note that the link between > Melchizedek and the patriarchal priesthood is even closer according to > Jewish and Christian tradition. Several ancient sources identify > Melchizedek with the patriarch Shem, the first-born of Noah (Gen > 6:10), whose genealogy in Genesis indicates that he lived into and > beyond the lifetime of Abraham (Gen 11:10-11). This tradition appears > in the oldest translations of Genesis into Aramaic (*Targum > Neofiti* and *Fragmentary Targum* at Gen 14:18), in > rabbinic commentaries on the Pentateuch (*Genesis Rabbah* 43, > 6; *Leviticus Rabbah* 25, 6; *Numbers Rabbah* 4, 8), > in the Babylonian Talmud (b. *Nedarim* 32b), and in other > religious works as well (e.g., *Pirqe de Rabbi Eliezar* 8, > 2). It was also aired in ancient Christian writings, such as those of > St. Ephraem the Syrian (*Commentary on Genesis* 11, 2), St. > Jerome (*Letters* 73), and St. Thomas Aquinas (*Commentary on > Hebrews* 7, 1). Noted theologians such as Alcuin, Peter > Lombard, and Nicholas of Lyra also found insight in the identification > of Melchizedek as Shem, as did the *Glossa Ordinaria,* the > running commentary that filled the margins of the medieval Latin > Bible. Martin Luther accepted this interpretation as late as the > sixteenth century (*Lectures on Genesis* 14, 18). Admittedly, > it is uncertain whether the author of Hebrews ever knew or accepted > this tradition, but it would certainly enhance the parallelism between > Melchizedek and Jesus, who is hailed as the Father\'s \"first-born\" > (Heb 1:6).

MELCHIZEDEK TYPOLOGY IN THE LETTER TO THE HEBREWS

> With this background in mind, let us examine how the priesthood of > Christ is linked with the order of Melchizedek. (1) *Royal > Priesthood.* In the theology of Hebrews, Jesus is both king > and high priest, just like Melchizedek. For much of the Old Testament > period, these two offices were entrusted to two different families: > Aaron and his descendants from the tribe of Levi were the priests, > while David and his descendants from the tribe of Judah were the > kings. However, in the ancient order of Melchizedek, the patriarch, > and eventually his first-born heir, wore the two crowns of ruling and > religious authority. (2) *Priesthood in Salem.* The ministry > of Melchizedek in the earthly Salem foreshadows the ministry of Jesus > in the \"heavenly Jerusalem\" (Heb > 12:22). According to Hebrews, > this is the celestial city that the Lord has \"prepared\" for the > saints (Heb 11:16); it is the > city high above, whose \"builder and maker is God\" (Heb > 11:10). There Jesus ministers > as king and high priest of the People of God (Heb > 8:1-5), having entered into > heaven when he ascended into glory (Heb > 4:14; > 9:24). (3) *Inheritance of the > Son.* The patriarchal form of the priesthood, based in the > natural order of the family, is an earthly model of what is now > established in the divine family of God. The Father has raised up > Jesus as a Son, indeed, as the \"first-born\" Son (1:6), exalting him > over the angels (Heb 1-2) as > well as over the Levitical mediators of the Mosaic covenant (Heb > 5-10). Being the Father\'s > eldest Son in the family of faith (Rom > 8:29), he is the designated > heir who is given authority over the entire created order (Heb > 1:2-3). His relational identity > is thus akin to a father figure, for he ministers to believers both as > his \"brethren\" (Heb 2:11) > and as his \"children\" (Heb > 2:13). (4) *Signs of Bread and > Wine.* In the heavenly sanctuary, Jesus offers the Father his > \"body\" (Heb 10:10) and his > \"blood\" (Heb 9:12). This > messianic sacrifice is perceived by faith but is veiled from our > senses. So for us who eat from his \"altar\" (Heb > 13:10), these have the > sacramental appearance of bread and wine (Mt > 26:26-28), the very elements > once offered in thanksgiving by the royal priest Melchizedek (Gen > 14:18). « Back to Hebrews 8:1.