---
type: bible
title: Philippians – Introduction – Ignatius Catholic Study Bible
aliases:
  - Philippians – Introduction – Ignatius Catholic Study Bible
tags:
  - bible/new-testament
created: 2026-04-01
modified: 2026-04-12
publish: true
description: Philippians – Introduction – Ignatius Catholic Study Bible
---

# Introduction

**Author and Date** The Apostle Paul is widely regarded as the author of Philippians (1:1). Only a few scholars have ever challenged this tradition, and their attempts to offer alternative theories of authorship have failed to convince the majority of interpreters to follow their lead. Internal evidence bears out the traditional view, for its many personal references cohere well with the life and experiences of Paul known from the Book of Acts and his other epistles. The style and theology of Philippians are likewise Pauline, although the letter shows a friendly side of the apostle that is sometimes hidden in his more formal and polemical writings.

That being said, several modern scholars debate the unity of the letter as it now stands. Changes in tone and subject matter suggest to some that Philippians is a composite of two, or possibly three, Pauline letters that have been merged together into a single work. For example, the abrupt transition between 3:1, which sounds like a natural conclusion, and 3:2, which spins the discussion off in a new direction, is read as an internal clue that separate letters, presumably written on different occasions, have been joined together. Nevertheless, hypotheses of this sort are not accepted by all. Many continue to defend the unity of Philippians on the grounds that similar ideas and expressions run across the alleged divisions and give the canonical form of the letter a sufficient degree of thematic consistency to warrant acceptance as a single composition.

Attempts to date Philippians generally begin with Paul\'s stated imprisonment (1:7, 13-14, 17). Though Paul was jailed a number of times in different places (2 Cor 11:23), this likely refers to his first imprisonment in Rome between A.D. 60 and 62, where he lived with a Roman soldier under house arrest (Acts 28:16, 30). References to the \"praetorian guard\" (Phil 1:13) and \"Caesar\'s household\" (4:22) lend credence to Rome as the setting of the letter, and Paul\'s expectation of an imminent trial (1:26; 2:24) points to A.D. 62 as a likely date for its composition. Alternative views maintain that Paul was writing from Ephesus, Corinth, or Caesarea and propose earlier dates for the letter in the middle or late 50s.

**Destination** Philippi was the leading city of eastern Macedonia (northern Greece) in the first century and held a strategic position on the Egnatian Way, the major travel route connecting Italy and the West with Asia Minor and the East. The city was named after Philip II of Macedon, the father of Alexander the Great, and was established by Caesar Augustus as a Roman military colony in the first century B.C. Its inhabitants were mainly retired army veterans who enjoyed the status of Roman citizenship and other civic privileges. Unlike many prestigious cities of the Roman world at this time, Philippi had only a small Jewish population. Paul and his companions founded the Church here on his second missionary journey about A.D. 50 (Acts 16:11-40) and made one or more return visits on his third missionary journey (Acts 20:1-6). It is difficult to determine how long Paul stayed in Philippi on these occasions, but it was long enough to develop a close relationship with the young community. The Philippian Church was the first to be established by Paul on the mainland of Europe.

**Purpose** Philippians does not address any doctrinal or disciplinary crisis; rather, it is a letter of thanks and encouragement to a congregation of dear friends. The gratitude that Paul expresses throughout the letter is a response to their generosity. The Philippians supported the imprisoned apostle through their constant prayers (1:19), as well as by sending him financial assistance by the hand of Epaphroditus (4:18). The Philippians had come to Paul\'s assistance several times in this way, acquiring for themselves a reputation as one of his most gracious congregations (4:15-16). Paul sent this letter back to them by the same messenger, Epaphroditus (2:25-30), to thank them for their gift, to update them on personal matters, and to assure them of God\'s rich blessings in return (2:25-30; 4:19). The only real concerns that Paul addresses in the letter have to do with resolving a personal conflict between two Philippian women (4:2-3) and with putting the congregation on guard against Judaizing missionaries, who, should they make their way to Philippi, would likely pressure them to receive circumcision (3:2-3). Lastly, Paul wrote to prepare the Philippians for the arrival of Timothy (2:19-23) and to express his own desire to see them if possible (2:24).

**Themes and Characteristics** Philippians follows an informal structure and is marked by a joyous and personal tone. The letter is almost entirely positive, with only brief warnings and almost no polemics. Because Paul is not formulating an extended argument on a controversial issue, his thoughts sometimes skip from one topic to another, much as a personal letter is loosely arranged according to the wishes of the sender. Doctrine is present in the letter but is not predominant. Paul gives most of his attention to exhortation and encouragement.

Much of this letter challenges the Philippians to grow in spiritual maturity by imitating both their Savior and their founding apostle. For this reason, Paul holds up Jesus Christ as the model of humility and selfless love and himself as a model of patient endurance. **(1)** *Jesus the Servant.* The example of Christ comes in 2:1-11, where Paul admonishes readers to serve one another in the Lord. To overcome pride and disunity, he summons them to live like Jesus by putting their neighbors\' interests above their own (2:4). This calls for a spirit of sacrifice and humility (2:3). Inspiration for this is drawn from a poetic account of the humiliation and exultation of Jesus (2:5-11). Although divine and infinitely glorious, Christ freely \"emptied himself\" to become a man (2:7). He lived entirely at the service of others, and his heroic obedience to the Father carried him all the way to the Cross. This, says Paul, was so pleasing in God\'s eyes that he exalted Christ to the highest summit of heavenly glory. A similar inheritance awaits believers who tread the same path of suffering and obedience marked out by their Lord (2:12-18). **(2)** *Paul the Servant.* Paul is likewise a worthy model for imitation (3:17; 4:9). Though in prison, his apostolic zeal emboldens others to witness to the faith as he did (1:14). Though persecuted, his joy and optimism go forth to encourage readers undergoing their own struggles (4:4-7). Paul\'s confidence reaches its peak in his devotion to Jesus Christ, whom he is prepared to honor with his whole life, whether by preaching the gospel after his release or by marching to his death as a martyr (1:19-26). The secret of Paul\'s serenity is in the Lord, who sustains his spirit even in the most trying circumstances of life. He shares this secret with the Philippians, urging them to follow his lead by taking everything in stride---be it prosperity or persecution---confident that Jesus will supply the strength needed to live every moment for the glory of God (4:10-13). «

---

Holy Bible. *Revised Standard Version, Second Catholic Edition*. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2006.