---
type: book
title: Chapter 36 – How to Attain to the Life of Prayer and Persevere in It
author: Garrigou-Lagrange
aliases:
  - Ch 36. How to Attain to the Life of Prayer and Persevere in It
  - GLTTA-1-454
  - GLTTA-1-455
  - GLTTA-1-456
  - GLTTA-1-457
  - GLTTA-1-458
  - GLTTA-1-459
  - GLTTA-1-460
tags:
  - author/garrigou-lagrange
  - term/humility
  - type/book
book_volume: 1
book_part: 2
book_chapter: 38
created: 2026-03-24
modified: 2026-04-06
publish: true
book_chapter_part: 1
---

[Previous](tta047.md) | [Next](tta049.md)

> [!NOTE] Part II
> The Purification of the Soul in Beginners (cont)

# Ch 36. How to Attain to the Life of Prayer and Persevere in It

## Page 454

WE HAVE defined prayer and explained how that of begin ners tend to become increasingly simple in order that it may
become the prayer of simplicity described by Bossuet. We shall now
explain how a person can attain to the life of prayer thus conceived
and persevere in it.

# How to Attain to This Life

We must remember, first of all, that prayer depends especially on
the grace of God; hence we prepare for it far less by processes,
which might remain mechanical, than by humility, for "God . . .
giveth grace to the humble," 1 and He makes us humble in order to
load us with His gifts. To remind us of the necessity of humility and
simplicity, or purity of intention, Christ said to his apostles: "Unless
you be converted and become as little children, you shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven," 2 especially into the intimacy of the
kingdom, or into the life of prayer. God Himself is pleased to in-
struct immediately those who are truly humble of heart; such was
the peasant of Ars who remained for a long time in silence near the
tabernacle, in intimate and wordless conversation with our Lord.
If we love to be nothing, to accept contempt, and not only accept
it, but end by loving it, we shall make great progress in prayer; we
shall be loaded with gifts far beyond all our desires.

Preparation for the life of prayer depends not only on humility,
but also on mortification, which is the spirit and practice of detach-

1 Jas. 4:6; I Pet. 5:5; Prov. 3:34.
2 Matt. 18:3.

## 455

ment from sensible things and from self. Clearly, if our minds are
preoccupied with worldly interests and affairs, and our souls agitated
by too human an affection, by jealousy, by the memory of wrongs
done us by our neighbor, or by rash judgments, we shall not be
able to converse with our Lord. If in the course of the day we
criticize our superiors or fail in docility toward them, when eve-
ning comes we shall hardly be likely to find the presence of God
in prayer. Therefore all inordinate inclinations must be mortified
so that charity may take the uncontested first place in our soul and
rise spontaneously toward God in distress as well as in consolation.

To attain to the life of prayer, we must, in the course of the day,
often lift our hearts to God, converse with Christ about every-
thing, as with the guide who leads us in our ascent; and then when
we stop for a moment to chat more intimately with our Guide, we
shall have something to say to Him; above all, we shall know how
to listen to His inspirations because we shall be on holy and intimate
terms with Him. To reach this intimacy, young religious are often
taught to "sanctify the hour" when it strikes, that is, to offer it to
the Lord in order to be more united to Him during the following
period of time. It is also advised, especially on certain feast days
or on the first Friday of the month, to multiply from morning until
evening acts of love of God and our neighbor, not in a mechanical
manner, such as counting them, but as the occasion presents itself:
for example, on meeting a person, whether that person be naturally
congenial to us or not. If we are faithful to this practice, we shall
find when evening comes that we are closely united to God.

Finally, we must create silence in our soul; we must quiet our
more or less inordinate passions in order to hear the interior Master,
who speaks in a low voice as a friend to his friend. If we are habitually
preoccupied with ourselves, seek ourselves in our work, in study
and exterior activity, how shall we delight in the sublime harmonies
of the mysteries of the Blessed Trinity present in us, of the re-
demptive Incarnation, and of the Eucharist? The disorder and
clamor of our sensibility must truly cease for the life of prayer.
Therefore the Lord at times so profoundly cultivates the sensible
appetites, especially in the passive night of the senses, that they may
eventually become silent and submit with docility to the mind or to
the superior part of rhe soul.

All this work of life may be called the remote preparation for

## 456

prayer. It is far more important than the immediate preparation, that
is, than the choice of a subject; for this latter preparation has as its
object only to excite the fire of charity, which ought never to be ex-
tinguished in us and which should be continually fed with a gener-
osity sustained by fidelity to the duty of the present moment.

To further this remote preparation, we must advise what has been
called prayer while working; in other words, choosing about a
quarter of an hour in the middle of the morning or afternoon, in
the very midst of our work, whether intellectual or external, with
the intention, not of interrupting it, but of accomplishing it in a
holier manner under the eye of God. This practice is most profit-
able. By it we reach the point of no longer seeking self in our work,
of renouncing what is too natural and somewhat egotistical in our
activity, so that we may sanctify it and preserve union with God by
placing all our energies at His service, by freeing ourselves from
complacency in personal satisfaction.

Thus generous and simple souls, in the wide sense of the term, will
reach an uninterrupted conformity with the divine will and will
practically always preserve the presence of God, which will render
the immediate preparation for prayer less necessary. They will be
already disposed, inclined to turn to God, as the stone turns toward
the center of the earth as soon as a void is created beside it. They will
thus reach a true life of prayer, which will be for them a kind of
spiritual respiration.

# How to Persevere in the Life of Prayer

With perseverance much can be gained; without it, everything
can be lost. Perseverance is not easy: a struggle must be carried on
against self, against spiritual sloth, against the devil, who inclines us
to discouragement. Many souls, on being deprived of the first con-
solations which they received, turn back; among them are souls that
had made considerable advance. We may cite the case of St. Cath-
erine of Genoa, who from the age of thirteen was drawn by God
to prayer and made great progress in it; after five years of suffering,
she abandoned the interior life, and for the next five years led a com-
pletely exterior life. However, one day when, on the advice of
her sister, she was going to confession, she experienced with anguish
the profound void in her soul; the desire of God revived in her.

## 457

In an instant she was taken back by God in the strongest, most
imperious manner and, after fourteen years of great penance, she
received assurance that she had fully satisfied divine justice. "If I
should turn back," she said then, "I should wish my eyes to be
torn out, and even that would not seem sufficient." Such vigorous
words of the saints express concretely what all theologians say
abstractly: that it is better to lose one's sight than to lose grace, or
even to retrogress on the way to eternity. For anyone who knows
the value of life, the value of time in relation to eternity, this state-
ment is incontestable. It is, therefore, most important to persevere
and to press forward.

Some souls, after struggling for a long time, become discouraged
when they are perhaps only a few steps from the fountain of living
water. Then, without prayer, they no longer have the strength to
carry the cross generously; they let themselves slip into an easy,
superficial life, in which others might perhaps be saved, but in
which they run the risk of being lost. Why is this? Because their
vigorous faculties, which were made to seek God, will incline them,
in their search for the absolute which they desire, to look for it
where it is not. For certain strong souls, mediocrity is not possible;
if they do not give themselves entirely to God on the road of
sanctity, they will belong wholly to themselves. They will wish to
spend their life enjoying their ego; they run the risk of turning
away from God and of placing their last end in the satisfaction of
their pride or of their concupiscences. In this respect, certain souls
somewhat resemble the angels. The angel, says St. Thomas, is either
very holy or very wicked; there is no middle course. The angel
makes a choice either of ardent charity or of irremissible mortal sin;
venial sin is impossible for a pure spirit, since immediately seeing the
end, its will is completely engaged. Either it becomes holy, forever
established in supernatural good, or it turns away from God for-
ever. (3)

Some souls absolutely need prayer, intimate and profound prayer;
another form of prayer will not suffice for them. There are very in-
telligent people whose character is difficult, intellectuals who will
dry up in their work, in study, in seeking themselves therein with
pride, unless they lead a life of true prayer, which for them should
be a life of mental prayer. It alone can give them a childlike soul in

(3) St. Thomas, Ia IIae, q. 89, a.4.

## 458

regard to God, to the Savior, and to the Blessed Virgin. It alone can
teach them the profound meaning of Christ's words: "Unless . . .
you become as little children, you shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven." It is, therefore, important, especially for certain souls,
to persevere in prayer; unless they do so, they are almost certain to
abandon the interior life and perhaps come to ruin.

To persevere in prayer two things are necessary: to have con-
fidence in Christ, who calls all pious souls to the living waters of
prayer, and humbly to allow ourselves to be led by the road He
Himself has chosen for us. First of all, we must have confidence in
Him. We fail in this regard when, after the first slightly prolonged
periods of aridity, we decide that prayer is not for us, nor we for
it. On this score, we might as well say, as the Jansenists did, that
frequent Communion is not for us, but only for a few great saints.
Our Lord calls all souls to this intercourse of friendship with Him.
He compares Himself to the good shepherd, who leads his sheep to
the eternal pastures, that they may feed on the word of God, In
these pastures is the fountain of living water of which Christ spoke
to the Samaritan woman, who was, nevertheless, a sinner: "If thou
didst know the gift of God, and who He is that saith to thee: Give
Me to drink; thou perhaps wouldst have asked of Him, and He
would have given thee living water." 4 Likewise at Jerusalem on a
festal day, "Jesus stood and cried, saying: If any man thirst, let him
come to Me, and drink. He that believeth in Me, as the Scripture
saith: Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. Now this
He said of the Spirit which they should receive who believed in
Him." (5)

The fountain of water (fons vivus) is the Holy Ghost, who has
been sent to us, who is given to us with infused charity which unites
us to Him. Moreover, He has been given to us as interior Master and
Comforter to make us penetrate and taste the inner meaning of the
Gospel: "The Paraclete, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in My name, He will teach you all things, and bring all things
to your mind, whatsoever I shall have said to you." (6) This was real-
ized for the apostles on Pentecost, and for us, proportionately, on
the day of our confirmation. Therefore St. John writes to the simple

4 John 4:10.
5 John 7:37-39.
6 John 14:26.

## 459

faithful in his First Epistle: "You have the unction from the Holy
One. . . . Let the unction, which you have received from Him,
abide in you. ... His unction teacheth you of all things" 7 useful
to salvation.

St. Paul says also: "The charity of God is poured forth in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost, who is given to us." 8 The Holy Ghost
is thus in all the just, in every soul in the state of grace. He, who is
subsistent Love itself, dwells in us, not to remain idle but to operate
in us, to be our interior Master by His seven gifts, which are perma-
nent, infused dispositions given to assure our docility to Him. These
dispositions grow in us with charity. Therefore, if we do not better
hear the holy inspirations of the interior Master, it is because we are
listening too intently to ourselves and are not sufficiently desirous
of the profound reign of God in us. To persevere in prayer, we must,
therefore, have confidence in Christ and in the Holy Ghost whom
He has sent to us.

Finally, we must allow ourselves to be led by the path which our
Lord has chosen for us. There is, to be sure, the common and in-
dispensable way, that of humility and conformity to the divine
will; hence we must all pray as the publican did. But on this common
road, one part is shaded, the other has nothing to protect it from
the burning rays of the sun; one section is flat, followed by long,
steep hills that lead to high plateaus where we may enjoy a mar-
velous view. The good Shepherd leads His sheep as He judges best.
Some He guides by the parables, others by the way of reasoning;
to others He gives, in the obscurity of faith, simple and penetrating
intuition, great views of the whole, which are the distinctive char-
acteristic of wisdom. He leaves certain souls for a rather long time
in difficulties in order to inure them to the struggle. For several years
St. Teresa herself had to make use of a book in order to meditate,
and the time seemed very long to her. Our Lord raises the Marys
rather than the Marthas to contemplation, but the former find
therein intimate sufferings unknown to the latter; and if the latter
are faithful, they will reach the living waters and will slake their
thirst according to their desire.

We must, therefore, allow ourselves to be led by the road which
the Lord has chosen for us. If aridity is prolonged, we should know

7 Cf. I John 2:20, 27.

8 Rom. 5:5.

## 460

that it does not spring from lukewarmness, provided that we have no
taste for the things of the world but rather concern for our spiritual
progress. Aridity, on the contrary, is very useful, like fire that must
dry out the wood before setting it ablaze. Aridity is needed precisely
to dry up our too lively, too impetuous, exuberant, and tumultuous
sensibility, so that finally the sensible appetites may be quieted and
become submissive to the spirit; so that, above these passing emo-
tions, there may grow in us the strong and pure love of charity,
which has its seat in the elevated part of the soul.

Then if we are faithful, as St. Thomas teaches, (9) we shall gradually
begin to contemplate God in the mirror of sensible things, or in that
of the parables. Our soul will rise from one of these parables to the
thought of infinite mercy, by a straight movement, like that of a
lark soaring directly from earth toward heaven.

At other times we shall contemplate God in the mirror of the
mysteries of salvation, aiding ourselves, for example, by recalling
the mysteries of the Rosary. By a spiral (oblique) movement
analogous to the flight of the swallow, we shall rise from the joyful
to the sorrowful mysteries, and to those which announce the life
of heaven.

Finally, on certain days we shall contemplate God in Himself,
holding fast in the obscurity of faith to the thought of His in-
finite goodness which communicates to us all the blessings we re-
ceive. By a circular movement similar to that of the eagle high in the
air, we shall repeatedly come back to this thought of the divine
goodness. And, whereas the egoist always thinks of himself and
refers everything to himself, we shall begin to think always of God
dwelling in us, and to refer everything to Him. Then, even when
the most unforeseen and painful events occur, we shall think of the
glory of God and of the manifestation of His goodness, and we shall
glimpse from afar the supreme Good toward which everything, trials
as well as joys, should converge. This is truly the life of prayer,
which allows us to see all things in God; it is the normal prelude of
eternal life.

9 Cf. IIa Ilae, q.180, a. 6.
