---
type: bible
title: First Timothy – Introduction – Ignatius Catholic Study Bible
aliases:
  - First Timothy – Introduction – Ignatius Catholic Study Bible
tags:
  - bible/new-testament
created: 2026-04-01
modified: 2026-04-09
publish: true
description: First Timothy – Introduction – Ignatius Catholic Study Bible
---

# Introduction

**Author** First Timothy purports to be a letter from the Apostle Paul (1:1), as do the letters of 2 Timothy (2 Tim 1:1) and Titus (Tit 1:1). These three epistles, closely related to one another in theme and purpose, are collectively known as the Pastoral Epistles. From earliest times, Christians accepted these letters as authentic compositions of Paul. Bishops such as Clement of Rome (A.D. 95) and Polycarp (A.D. 120) allude to the Pastoral Epistles as genuine Pauline writings, and later theologians such as Irenaeus (A.D. 180), Tertullian (A.D. 200), and Clement of Alexandria (A.D. 200) make direct assertions to this effect.

Despite the constancy of this view in early Christian times, the tradition of Pauline authorship came under fire in the nineteenth century. Increasingly scholars began to regard the Pastoral Epistles as pseudepigraphical letters that were written in Paul\'s name by one or more of his disciples several decades after his death. This position, which continues to dominate much of modern scholarship, contends that the Pastoral Epistles are conspicuously different from Paul\'s undisputed letters in vocabulary, style, and emphasis, and for this reason, they cannot be regarded as genuine writings of the apostle. Regarding their historical content, some insist these writings bear witness to an advanced stage of Church government that did not exist in Paul\'s day and that the details they claim to provide of Paul\'s missionary efforts are inconsistent with his travels known from the Book of Acts and the other Pauline epistles. These and other arguments provide the basis for the pseudepigraphical hypothesis.

That being said, the distinctiveness of the Pastoral Epistles is a factor that must be weighed carefully, for the evidence can be interpreted in different ways. For instance, even critics who deny Pauline authorship generally recognize traces of Paul\'s thinking throughout these letters, and this leaves open the possibility of a closer relationship to the apostle than that envisioned by pseudepigraphical advocates. Stylistic differences between the Pastorals and Paul\'s undisputed writings, while undeniable, probably have more to do with differences in purpose and subject matter than anything else. After all, the Pastoral Epistles are written to pastors (Timothy and Titus) who are already well-seasoned and educated leaders in the Church, while Paul\'s other letters are written to instruct young congregations in the basics of Christian faith. Allegations that the ecclesiastical hierarchy outlined in the Pastorals was unknown to the Church of Paul\'s day are likewise overdrawn, since several passages in the undisputed letters of Paul point to a structured system of leadership already in place during the earliest days of the Church (1 Cor 12:28; Phil 1:1; 1 Thess 5:12; cf. Acts 14:23; 20:17). As for Paul\'s travel itinerary, one must admit that these letters claim to give us information about Paul\'s career that is otherwise uncorroborated in the NT. Nevertheless, this can be taken as an earmark of Pauline authorship, since it is more likely that a literary forgery would stay within the outline of Paul\'s life set forth in the Book of Acts and his genuine letters rather than depart from it. Otherwise, the attempt to pass off these letters as authentic Pauline writings would surely fail to convince the original recipients that they were reading the words of the apostle. In the end, the case against Pauline authorship is neither airtight nor immune to criticism, and the tradition that Paul himself composed the Pastoral Epistles can still be critically and convincingly defended.

**Date** Proponents of Pauline authorship generally date 1 Timothy in the mid 60s, between Paul\'s first Roman imprisonment (A.D. 60 to 62) and his martyrdom at the hands of Emperor Nero (ca. A.D. 67). It is likely that during this intervening time Paul resumed his missionary activities in the eastern parts of the Roman world and then turned his attention west toward a new mission in the province of Spain (Rom 15:24). Timothy\'s placement in \"Ephesus\" and Paul\'s movements in \"Macedonia\" put the letter somewhere in the eastern phase of this period (1 Tim 1:3). Scholars who deny the Pauline authorship of 1 Timothy date it much later, between A.D. 80 and 110.

**Destination and Themes** The letter was written to Paul\'s associate Timothy, who was stationed in Ephesus on special assignment (1:3). The Ephesian Church was at this time threatened by a serious pastoral crisis, with teachers and shepherds leading the flock away from the certainties of divine revelation into the mists of conjecture and speculation (1:3-7; 6:3-5). Timothy was charged with the difficult task of repairing the damage done by these troublemakers, two of whom Paul was forced to excommunicate (1:20) when he passed through on his way to Macedonia (1:3). Unable to return immediately, Paul wrote to admonish Timothy and authorize his mission to help this struggling congregation to safety.

The bulk of the letter, which is personal in tone and informal in arrangement, covers the gamut of Timothy\'s pastoral responsibilities. Paul was counting on him to stabilize the Church with sound doctrine (4:6-7; 6:20) and the appointment of reliable pastors to shepherd the flock (3:1-13; 5:22). Among the congregation, he was to encourage prayer (2:1-8), set limits on the dress and conduct of women (2:9-15), attend to his liturgical duties (4:13), show respect for parishioners of all ages (5:1-2), manage the support of widows (5:3-16), take a public stand against wrongdoers (5:20), and, above all, keep himself unstained by sin (4:12; 5:22; 6:11-14). As a loyal friend and traveling assistant of the apostle, Timothy was well suited for this task, as he had been sent on previous assignments to other young Churches in Corinth (1 Cor 4:17), Philippi (Phil 2:19), and Thessalonica (1 Thess 3:2). «
