---
title: I. Blessing and Adoration
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-02
type: catechism
publish: true
aliases:
  - 4.1.1.3.p96
  - ccc-2626
  - ccc-2627
  - ccc-2628
  - I. Blessing and Adoration
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-4
  - term/adoration
  - term/blessing
  - term/contemplation
  - vault-admin/graph/bible-ccc
author: Catholic Church
ccc_chapter: one
ccc_part: four
ccc_section: one
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P96.HTM
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART FOUR: CHRISTIAN PRAYER
	- SECTION ONE PRAYER IN THE CHRISTIAN LIFE
		- CHAPTER ONE THE REVELATION OF PRAYER - THE UNIVERSAL CALL TO PRAYER
			- Article 3 IN THE AGE OF THE CHURCH
				- I. Blessing and Adoration

**[[4.1.1.3.p95|Previous]]** - **[[4.1.1.3.p97|Next]]**

---

# I. Blessing and Adoration

2626 Blessing expresses the basic movement of Christian prayer: it is an encounter between God and man. In blessing, God's gift and man's acceptance of it are united in dialogue with each other. the prayer of blessing is man's response to God's gifts: because God blesses, the human heart can in return bless the One who is the source of every blessing. ^ccc-2626

2627 TWO fundamental forms express this movement: our prayer ascends in the Holy Spirit through Christ to the Father - we bless him for having blessed us;<sup>97</sup> it implores the grace of the Holy Spirit that descends through Christ from the Father - he blesses us.<sup>98</sup> ^ccc-2627

2628 Adoration is the first attitude of man acknowledging that he is a creature before his Creator. It exalts the greatness of the Lord who made us <sup>99</sup> and the almighty power of the Savior who sets us free from evil. Adoration is homage of the spirit to the "King of Glory," <sup>100</sup> respectful silence in the presence of the "ever greater" God.<sup>101</sup> Adoration of the thrice-holy and sovereign God of love blends with humility and gives assurance to our supplications. ^ccc-2628

---

**[97]** Cf. [[ephesians-01#^ephesians-01-3|Eph 1:3-14;]] [[2-corinthians-01|2 Cor 1]]:3 7; [[1-peter-01#^1-peter-01-3|1 Pet 1:3-9.]]

**[98]** Cf. [[2-corinthians-13#^2-corinthians-13-14|2 Cor 13:14;]] [[romans-15#^romans-15-5|Rom 15:5-6, 13;]] [[ephesians-06#^ephesians-06-23|Eph 6:23-24.]]

**[99]** Cf. [[psalm-95#^psalm-95-1|Ps 95:1-6.]]

**[100]** Ps 24, 9-10.

**[101]** Cf. St. Augustine, En. in Ps. 62,16: PL 36, 757-758.

---

**[[4.1.1.3.p95|Previous]]** - **[[4.1.1.3.p97|Next]]**

---
