---
title: Article 3, In The Age of the Church
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-02
type: catechism
publish: true
aliases:
  - 4.1.1.3.p95
  - Article 3, in the Age of the Church
  - Article 3, In The Age of the Church
  - ccc-2623
  - ccc-2624
  - ccc-2625
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-4
  - vault-admin/graph/bible-ccc
author: Catholic Church
ccc_chapter: one
ccc_part: four
ccc_section: one
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P95.HTM
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART FOUR: CHRISTIAN PRAYER
	- SECTION ONE PRAYER IN THE CHRISTIAN LIFE
		- CHAPTER ONE THE REVELATION OF PRAYER - THE UNIVERSAL CALL TO PRAYER
			- Article 3 IN THE AGE OF THE CHURCH

**[[4.1.1.2.p94|Previous]]** - **[[4.1.1.3.p96|Next]]**

---

# Article 3, in the Age of the Church

2623 On the day of Pentecost, the Spirit of the Promise was poured out on the disciples, gathered "together in one place." <sup>92</sup> While awaiting the Spirit, "all these with one accord devoted themselves to prayer." <sup>93</sup> The Spirit who teaches the Church and recalls for her everything that Jesus said <sup>94</sup> was also to form her in the life of prayer. ^ccc-2623

2624 In the first community of Jerusalem, believers "devoted themselves to the apostles' teaching and fellowship, to the breaking of bread, and the prayers." <sup>95</sup> This sequence is characteristic of the Church's prayer: founded on the apostolic faith; authenticated by charity; nourished in the Eucharist. ^ccc-2624

2625 In the first place these are prayers that the faithful hear and read in the Scriptures, but also that they make their own - especially those of the Psalms, in view of their fulfillment in Christ.<sup>96</sup> The Holy Spirit, who thus keeps the memory of Christ alive in his Church at prayer, also leads her toward the fullness of truth and inspires new formulations expressing the unfathomable mystery of Christ at work in his Church's life, sacraments, and mission. These formulations are developed in the great liturgical and spiritual traditions. the forms of prayer revealed in the apostolic and canonical Scriptures remain normative for Christian prayer. ^ccc-2625

---

**[92]** [[acts-of-the-apostles-02|Acts 2]]:1.

**[93]** [[acts-of-the-apostles-01|Acts of the Apostles, Chapter 1]]:14.

**[94]** Cf. [[john-14#^john-14-26|Jn 14:26.]]

**[95]** [[acts-of-the-apostles-02|Acts 2]]:42.

**[96]** Cf. [[luke-24|Lk 24]]:27, 44.

---

**[[4.1.1.2.p94|Previous]]** - **[[4.1.1.3.p96|Next]]**

---
