---
type: catechism
title: III. Our Father
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__PA3.HTM
aliases:
  - 4.2.0.2.pa3
  - ccc-2786
  - ccc-2787
  - ccc-2788
  - ccc-2789
  - ccc-2790
  - ccc-2791
  - ccc-2792
  - ccc-2793
  - III. Our Father
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-4
  - graph/bible-ccc
ccc_part: four
ccc_section: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART FOUR: CHRISTIAN PRAYER
	- SECTION TWO THE LORD'S PRAYER
		- Article 2 "OUR FATHER WHO ART IN HEAVEN"
			- III. "Our" Father

**[[4.2.0.2.pa2|Previous]]** - **[[4.2.0.2.pa4|Next]]**

---

# III. Our Father

2786 "Our" Father refers to God. the adjective, as used by us, does not express possession, but an entirely new relationship with God. ^ccc-2786

2787 When we say "our" Father, we recognize first that all his promises of love announced by the prophets are fulfilled in the new and eternal covenant in his Christ: we have become "his" people and he is henceforth "our" God. This new relationship is the purely gratuitous gift of belonging to each other: we are to respond to "grace and truth" given us in Jesus Christ with love and faithfulness.<sup>45</sup> ^ccc-2787

2788 Since the Lord's Prayer is that of his people in the "endtime," this "our" also expresses the certitude of our hope in God's ultimate promise: in the new Jerusalem he will say to the victor, "I will be his God and he shall be my son." <sup>46</sup> ^ccc-2788

2789 When we pray to "our" Father, we personally address the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. By doing so we do not divide the Godhead, since the Father is its "source and origin," but rather confess that the Son is eternally begotten by him and the Holy Spirit proceeds from him. We are not confusing the persons, for we confess that our communion is with the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, in their one Holy Spirit. the Holy Trinity is consubstantial and indivisible. When we pray to the Father, we adore and glorify him together with the Son and the Holy Spirit. ^ccc-2789

2790 Grammatically, "our" qualifies a reality common to more than one person. There is only one God, and he is recognized as Father by those who, through faith in his only Son, are reborn of him by water and the Spirit.<sup>47</sup> The Church is this new communion of God and men. United with the only Son, who has become "the firstborn among many brethren," she is in communion with one and the same Father in one and the same Holy Spirit.<sup>48</sup> In praying "our" Father, each of the baptized is praying in this communion: "The company of those who believed were of one heart and soul." <sup>49</sup> ^ccc-2790

2791 For this reason, in spite of the divisions among Christians, this prayer to "our" Father remains our common patrimony and an urgent summons for all the baptized. In communion by faith in Christ and by Baptism, they ought to join in Jesus' prayer for the unity of his disciples.<sup>50</sup> ^ccc-2791

2792 Finally, if we pray the Our Father sincerely, we leave individualism behind, because the love that we receive frees us from it. the "our" at the beginning of the Lord's Prayer, like the "us" of the last four petitions, excludes no one. If we are to say it truthfully, our divisions and oppositions have to be overcome.<sup>51</sup> ^ccc-2792

2793 The baptized cannot pray to "our" Father without bringing before him all those for whom he gave his beloved Son. God's love has no bounds, neither should our prayer.<sup>52</sup> Praying "our" Father opens to us the dimensions of his love revealed in Christ: praying with and for all who do not yet know him, so that Christ may "gather into one the children of God." <sup>53</sup> God's care for all men and for the whole of creation has inspired all the great practitioners of prayer; it should extend our prayer to the full breadth of love whenever we dare to say "our" Father. ^ccc-2793

---

**[45]** [[john-01|Jn 1]]:17; Cf. [[hosea-02#^hosea-02-21|Hos 2:21-22;]] 6:1-6.

**[46]** [[revelation-21#^revelation-21-7|Rev 21:7.]]

**[47]** Cf. [[1-john-05|1 Jn 5]]:1; [[john-03#^john-03-5|Jn 3:5.]]

**[48]** [[romans-08#^romans-08-29|Rom 8:29;]] Cf. [[ephesians-04#^ephesians-04-4|Eph 4:4-6.]]

**[49]** [[acts-of-the-apostles-04|Acts 4]]:32.

**[50]** Cf. UR 8; 22.

**[51]** Cf. [[matthew-05|Mt 5]]:23-24; 6:14-15.

**[52]** Cf. NA 5.

**[53]** [[john-11#^john-11-52|Jn 11:52.]]

---

**[[4.2.0.2.pa2|Previous]]** - **[[4.2.0.2.pa4|Next]]**

---
