---
type: catechism
title: "Section Two, The Lord's Prayer"
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P9V.HTM
aliases:
  - "Section Two, the Lord's Prayer"
  - "Section Two, The Lord's Prayer"
  - 4.2.0.0.p9v
  - ccc-2759
  - ccc-2760
  - Section Two, The Lord's Prayer
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-4
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/lords-prayer
ccc_part: four
ccc_section: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-04
publish: true
---

[[Catechism of the Catholic Church|Table of Contents]]

---

- PART FOUR: CHRISTIAN PRAYER
	- SECTION TWO THE LORD'S PRAYER

**[[4.1.3.3.p9u|Previous]]** - **[[4.2.0.1.p9w|Next]]**

---

# Section Two, the Lord's Prayer

I. "OUR FATHER!"

2759 Jesus "was praying at a certain place, and when he ceased, one of his disciples said to him, 'Lord, teach us to pray, as John taught his disciples.'" <sup>1</sup> In response to this request the Lord entrusts to his disciples and to his Church the fundamental Christian prayer. St. Luke presents a brief text of five petitions,<sup>2</sup> while St. Matthew gives a more developed version of seven petitions.<sup>3</sup> The liturgical tradition of the Church has retained St. Matthew's text: ^ccc-2759

**Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.**

2760 Very early on, liturgical usage concluded the Lord's Prayer with a doxology. In the Didache, we find, "For yours are the power and the glory for ever." <sup>4</sup> The Apostolic Constitutions add to the beginning: "the kingdom," and this is the formula retained to our day in ecumenical prayer.<sup>5</sup> ^ccc-2760

The Byzantine tradition adds after "the glory" the words "Father, Son, and Holy Spirit." the Roman Missal develops the last petition in the explicit perspective of "awaiting our blessed hope" and of the Second Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.<sup>6</sup> Then comes the assembly's acclamation or the repetition of the doxology from the Apostolic Constitutions.

---

**[1]** [[luke-11|Lk 11]]:1.

**[2]** Cf. [[luke-11|Lk 11]]:2-4.

**[3]** Cf. [[matthew-06|Mt 6]]:9-13.

**[4]** Didache 8, 2: SCh 248, 174.

**[5]** Apostolic Constitutions, 7, 24, 1: PG 1,1016.

**[6]** [[titus-02#^titus-02-13|Titus 2:13;]] cf. Roman Missal 22, Embolism after the Lord's Prayer.

---

**[[4.1.3.3.p9u|Previous]]** - **[[4.2.0.1.p9w|Next]]**

---
