---
title: General Principles of Ongoing Formation - OCDS Ongoing Formation Volume I
created: 2025-11-15
modified: 2026-04-02
type: formation-handbook
publish: false
aliases:
  - General Principles
  - General Principles of Ongoing Formation
author: Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites
---

# General Principles - OCDS Ongoing Formation Volume I

 Because there are no deadlines to finish materials in ongoing formation, the members are free to go into greater depth. It is allowable to continue a session over several months or to spend more than a year on a single theme or book. Once we are definitively professed and taking on more responsibilities in our community, it is tempting to give ongoing formation a lower priority. It is too easy to sacrifice the “important” to the “immediate.” The other side of the same coin is to feel we have “graduated” and can take things easy. This is unfortunate, because to serve well, to assist others, and to grow in prayer and virtue, we need to continually feed our souls and mature in our vocation. Initial formation is the foundation for life-long ongoing formation. No one stands still in their spiritual life; we either continue to advance on the way of perfection or eventually grow lukewarm. The challenge for Definitives is to guard against complacency. We need to maintain our first fervor, return to our roots, and keep our eyes on the prize. Our ultimate goal is eternal union with God. This is the pearl of great price, all that really matters. “Yet I hold this against you: You have forsaken the love you had at first. Consider how far you have fallen! Repent and do the things you did at first” (Rev. 2:4-5). “Do not merely listen to the word and so deceive yourselves. Do what it says. Anyone who listens to the word but does not do what it says is like someone who looks at his face in a mirror and, after looking at himself, goes away and immediately forgets what he looks like. But whoever looks intently into the perfect law that gives freedom and continues in it—not forgetting what they have heard but doing it—they will be blessed in what they do” (James 1:22-25). Our hope and prayer is that communities will give ongoing formation the attention and effort it requires to increase the Carmelite charism of those who have made their Definitive Promise. These guidelines are intended to help local councils, communities, and provinces do just that.

### Responsibilities of the Local Council

 “The Council, composed of the President and three Councilors and the Director of Formation, constitutes the immediate authority of the community. The primary responsibility of the Council is the formation and Christian and Carmelite maturing of the members of the community” (OCDS Const., Art. 46, emphasis added). After prayerful discussion and discernment, the local Council as a whole chooses themes and materials that are appropriate for the definitively professed members of their community. While the decision ultimately rests with the Council, it is good practice to ask the definitively professed members for their input.

 General Introduction

 p.9

 The Council chooses the areas of formation for deeper growth. Once the area of formation is decided upon, then pertinent book titles may be discussed, as opposed to deciding on a specific book before discussing areas for deeper growth. The Council, with the help of the members in ongoing formation, decides who will facilitate the discussions. This could be several members who trade off every month. Or even better, everyone should take a turn facilitating. Having everyone take a turn lets the members practice some of the skills needed to be a formator. A facilitator does not have to be more “learned” than the other Definitives to do the job. The facilitator’s role is to keep the discussion on topic and see to it that everyone has a chance to participate. As can be seen here, it is the responsibility of the local Council, and the definitively professed members themselves, to ensure that all definitively professed members receive and participate in ongoing formation with their community. Such formation involves a life-long study of solid spiritual materials that will enhance their Carmelite vocation, offering opportunities to share, live, and grow in accord with God’s grace. Therefore, it is important to frequently return to the fundamentals of our charism. Recognizing that some definitively professed members are called to serve as formators, local councils may wish to find ways for the formators to receive their own ongoing formation.

### Some Suggestions for Facilitators and the Participating Members

  Begin each session with prayer, invoking the Holy Spirit.  Ask if anyone has any questions about last month’s topics or about the reading assignment. Ask how the past month’s reading assignment went for them.  Discussion points may be used to get the conversation started. Avoid questions that require the members to search through the book for specific answers.  The purpose of our discussions is to give each other mutual support and encouragement. Participants help each other better understand and live our vocation, grow in prayer and virtue, live out the Gospel values in the world, and grow in the spirit of faith, hope, and love. Our goal is continual faithfulness and growth in our vocation, not simply to master a book’s contents.  Don’t feel that you must stop a good discussion to get to the next point. Going into depth on a useful topic will help the members more than working through a checklist of questions.  Help everyone have a chance to speak. This may mean gently restraining the more talkative members and asking the quieter members to share their thoughts.  Make an effort to stay on topic. While the discussions should be a free give-and-take among the participants and there is almost always personal sharing, try to keep it relevant to the matter at hand.  Be respectful of differing points of view.

 General Introduction

 p.10

  Everyone is responsible for coming prepared for the discussion. This includes attentively reading the materials ahead of time. Members are encouraged to write down thoughts and insights as they read and/or highlight passages they found especially helpful. Everyone is responsible to make an effort to actively participate in the conversation.  Some elements for discussion: o What is the author trying to say? o What did I read that has personal meaning for me? o What, if anything, does the Holy Spirit want me to share with others? o What can I take from what I have read to incorporate into my daily life as a Christian and as a Secular Carmelite?  Some points for personal reflection could be: o How do I see the Holy Spirit at work in my life and drawing me toward greater holiness? o With my gifts, talents, background, and situation, what aspect of Christ am I called to show to the world, both individually and as a member of my community? As said above, there is no constraint to finish the materials within a set period of time, leaving the participants free to go into greater depth in their study and discussions. Planned sessions may continue over several months, as needed. As a reminder, the discussion facilitator is not the “teacher.” The Holy Spirit is the guide — the one forming us. If we do not still ourselves, become recollected, and reserve quiet time for study and reflection, we are not allowing the Holy Spirit to enlighten us. As Fr. Donald Kinney, O.C.D., says: “This is why you cannot ‘speed read’ your formation.” Introductory explanation – the Ongoing Formation Program:  The Ongoing Formation Program supports members’ understanding and growth in the Discalced Carmelite charism of prayer. This program continues to emphasize the transformative process of human development within the context of Christian and Discalced Carmelite spirituality.  The program is intended to serve as a model. It covers many themes and sub-themes that resonate with our charism of prayer.  OCDS ongoing formation differs from the structured format of initial formation (Aspirancy, Formation I and II).  Communities, with the guidance of the local council, may use this formation program with flexibility by adapting the content to meet their needs and goals.  Communities may use the entire program as outlined, or they may choose an individual topic (such as a Church document or St. Elizabeth of the Trinity).  The Carmelite charism of prayer has an apostolic dimension, and it overflows with missionary fervor based on a passionate and dedicated interior life. “The vocation to the Secular Order is truly ecclesial. Prayer and apostolate, when they are true, are inseparable” (OCDS Const., Art. 26).

 General Introduction

 11

  The handbook gives prominence to St. Teresa and St. John of the Cross. Continuing study of their writings is crucial to the overall understanding of our Order’s charism. We have emphasized the importance of revisiting the materials contained in Formation I and II relating to Teresa, John, and Thérèse.  When studying the history and reform of Carmel, our focus should not be so much on chronological dates and numbers; instead, our study should unravel the transformation of consciousness/awareness throughout the history of the Order, within the context of the Carmelite charism of prayer. Most importantly, one should recognize in the history of Carmel the presence of God in all events, trials, and struggles.  Reading, reflection, and discussion make up a large part of ongoing formation. However, we must remember that formation is not just about studying many books or attending retreats and conferences. The goal is to be a loyal witness for Christ, remaining subject to ongoing purification, transformation, and ultimate union with God.  Carmelite spirituality is meant to be lived in the hustle and bustle of our daily lives. God communicates not so much through books and abstract ideas, but rather through the witness of life and interactions with others.  Our focus is always on turning our attention to love and desire for Christ and our dedication to do “what we should” in thought, word, and deed.  The essential points, themes, sub-themes, and read-along materials included in this handbook may be used effectively for community discussion as well.  Open-ended questions (questions that allow one to give a “free form” answer, as opposed to specific questions) should be part of the discussion points.
