---
type: catechism
title: Article 2, We Believe
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__PY.HTM
aliases:
  - 1.1.3.2.py
  - Article 2, We Believe
  - ccc-166
  - ccc-167
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-1
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/apostles-creed
  - term/nicene-creed
ccc_part: one
ccc_section: one
ccc_chapter: three
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-04
publish: true
---

- PART ONE: THE PROFESSION OF FAITH
	- SECTION ONE "I BELIEVE" - "WE BELIEVE"
		- CHAPTER THREE MAN'S RESPONSE TO GOD
			- Article 2 WE BELIEVE

**[[1.1.3.1.px|Previous]]** - **[[1.1.3.2.pz|Next]]**

---

# Article 2, We Believe

**WE BELIEVE**

166 Faith is a personal act - the free response of the human person to the initiative of God who reveals himself. But faith is not an isolated act. No one can believe alone, just as no one can live alone. ^ccc-166

You have not given yourself faith as you have not given yourself life. The believer has received faith from others and should hand it on to others. Our love for Jesus and for our neighbour impels us to speak to others about our faith. Each believer is thus a link in the great chain of believers. I cannot believe without being carried by the faith of others, and by my faith I help support others in the faith.

167 "I believe" ([[prayers/english/apostles-creed|The Apostles' Creed]]) is the faith of the Church professed personally by each believer, principally during Baptism. "We believe" (Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed - [[nicene-creed|Nicene Creed]]) is the faith of the Church confessed by the bishops assembled in council or more generally by the liturgical assembly of believers. "I believe" is also the Church, our mother, responding to God by faith as she teaches us to say both "I believe" and "We believe". ^ccc-167

---

**[[1.1.3.1.px|Previous]]** - **[[1.1.3.2.pz|Next]]**
