---
type: catechism
title: I. Christ - The Unique Word of Sacred Scripture
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__PO.HTM
aliases:
  - 1.1.2.3.po
  - ccc-101
  - ccc-102
  - ccc-103
  - ccc-104
  - I. Christ - the Unique Word of Sacred Scripture
  - I. Christ - The Unique Word of Sacred Scripture
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-1
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/scripture-sacred
  - term/word-of-god
  - vatican/constitutions/dei-verbum
ccc_part: one
ccc_section: one
ccc_chapter: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-04
publish: true
---

- PART ONE: THE PROFESSION OF FAITH
	- SECTION ONE "I BELIEVE" - "WE BELIEVE"
		- CHAPTER TWO GOD COMES TO MEET MAN
			- Article 3 SACRED SCRIPTURE
				- I. Christ - The Unique Word of Sacred Scripture

**[[1.1.2.2.pn|Previous]]** - **[[1.1.2.3.pp|Next]]**

---

**Article 3**

**SACRED SCRIPTURE**

# I. Christ - the Unique Word of Sacred Scripture

101 In order to reveal himself to men, in the condescension of his goodness God speaks to them in human words: "Indeed the words of God, expressed in the words of men, are in every way like human language, just as the Word of the eternal Father, when he took on himself the flesh of human weakness, became like men." <sup>63</sup> ^ccc-101

102 Through all the words of Sacred Scripture, God speaks only one single Word, his one Utterance in whom he expresses himself completely:<sup>64</sup> ^ccc-102

You recall that one and the same Word of God extends throughout Scripture, that it is one and the same Utterance that resounds in the mouths of all the sacred writers, since he who was in the beginning God with God has no need of separate syllables; for he is not subject to time.<sup>65</sup>

103 For this reason, the Church has always venerated the Scriptures as she venerates the Lord's Body. She never ceases to present to the faithful the bread of life, taken from the one table of God's Word and Christ's Body.<sup>66</sup> ^ccc-103

104 In Sacred Scripture, the Church constantly finds her nourishment and her strength, for she welcomes it not as a human word, "but as what it really is, the word of God".<sup>67</sup> "In the sacred books, the Father who is in heaven comes lovingly to meet his children, and talks with them." <sup>68</sup> ^ccc-104

---

**[63]** [[dei-verbum|Dei Verbum (DV)]] 13.

**[64]** Cf. [[hebrews-01#^hebrews-01-1|Heb 1:1-3

]]

**[65]** St. Augustine, En. in Ps. 103, 4, 1: PL 37, 1378; cf. Ps 104; [[john-01|Jn 1]]:1

**[66]** Cf. [[dei-verbum|Dei Verbum (DV)]] 21.

**[67]** Th 2:13; cf. [[dei-verbum|Dei Verbum (DV)]] 24.

**[68]** [[dei-verbum|Dei Verbum (DV)]] 21.

---

**[[1.1.2.2.pn|Previous]]** - **[[1.1.2.3.pp|Next]]**
