---
type: catechism
title: V. Sacred Scripture In The Life of the Church
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__PS.HTM
aliases:
  - 1.1.2.3.ps
  - ccc-131
  - ccc-132
  - ccc-133
  - V. Sacred Scripture in the Life of the Church
  - V. Sacred Scripture In The Life of the Church
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-1
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/homily
ccc_part: one
ccc_section: one
ccc_chapter: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-04
publish: true
---

- PART ONE: THE PROFESSION OF FAITH
	- SECTION ONE "I BELIEVE" - "WE BELIEVE"
		- CHAPTER TWO GOD COMES TO MEET MAN
			- Article 3 SACRED SCRIPTURE
				- V. Sacred Scripture in the Life of the Church

**[[1.1.2.3.pr|Previous]]** - **[[1.1.2.3.pt|Next]]**

---

# V. Sacred Scripture in the Life of the Church

131 "and such is the force and power of the Word of God that it can serve the Church as her support and vigour, and the children of the Church as strength for their faith, food for the soul, and a pure and lasting fount of spiritual life." <sup>109</sup> Hence "access to Sacred Scripture ought to be open wide to the Christian faithful." <sup>110</sup> ^ccc-131

132 "Therefore, the study of the sacred page should be the very soul of sacred theology. the ministry of the Word, too - pastoral preaching, catechetics and all forms of Christian instruction, among which the liturgical homily should hold pride of place - is healthily nourished and thrives in holiness through the Word of Scripture." <sup>111</sup> ^ccc-132

133 The Church "forcefully and specifically exhorts all the Christian faithful... to learn the surpassing knowledge of Jesus Christ, by frequent reading of the divine Scriptures. Ignorance of the Scriptures is ignorance of Christ.<sup>112</sup> ^ccc-133

---

**[109]** DV 21.

**[110]** DV 22.

**[111]** DV 24.

**[112]** DV 25; cf. [[philippians-03#^philippians-03-8|Phil 3:8]]and St. Jerome, Commentariorum in Isaiam libri xviii prol.: PL 24, 17B.

---

**[[1.1.2.3.pr|Previous]]** - **[[1.1.2.3.pt|Next]]**
