---
title: I. God Reveals His Plan of Loving Goodness
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-02
type: catechism
publish: true
aliases:
  - 1.1.2.1.pf
  - ccc-51
  - ccc-52
  - ccc-53
  - I. God Reveals His Plan of Loving Goodness
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-1
  - vatican/constitutions/dei-verbum
  - vault-admin/graph/bible-ccc
author: Catholic Church
ccc_chapter: two
ccc_part: one
ccc_section: one
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__PF.HTM
---

- PART ONE: THE PROFESSION OF FAITH
	- SECTION ONE "I BELIEVE" - "WE BELIEVE"
		- CHAPTER TWO GOD COMES TO MEET MAN
			- Article 1 THE REVELATION OF GOD
				- I. God Reveals His Plan of Loving Goodness

**[[1.1.2.0.pe|Previous]]** - **[[1.1.2.1.pg|Next]]**

---

**Article 1**

**THE REVELATION OF GOD**

# I. God Reveals His Plan of Loving Goodness

51 "It pleased God, in his goodness and wisdom, to reveal himself and to make known the mystery of his will. His will was that men should have access to the Father, through Christ, the Word made flesh, in the Holy Spirit, and thus become sharers in the divine nature." <sup>2</sup> ^ccc-51

52 God, who "dwells in unapproachable light", wants to communicate his own divine life to the men he freely created, in order to adopt them as his sons in his only-begotten Son.<sup>3</sup> By revealing himself God wishes to make them capable of responding to him, and of knowing him and of loving him far beyond their own natural capacity. ^ccc-52

53 The divine plan of Revelation is realized simultaneously "by deeds and words which are intrinsically bound up with each other" <sup>4</sup> and shed light on each another. It involves a specific divine pedagogy: God communicates himself to man gradually. He prepares him to welcome by stages the supernatural Revelation that is to culminate in the person and mission of the incarnate Word, Jesus Christ. ^ccc-53

St. Irenaeus of Lyons repeatedly speaks of this divine pedagogy using the image of God and man becoming accustomed to one another: the Word of God dwelt in man and became the Son of man in order to accustom man to perceive God and to accustom God to dwell in man, according to the Father's pleasure.<sup>5</sup>

---

**[2]** [[dei-verbum|Dei Verbum (DV)]] 2; cf. [[ephesians-01#^ephesians-01-9|Eph 1:9;]] 2:18; 2 Pt 1:4

**[3]** [[1-timothy-06|1 Tm 6]]::16, cf. [[ephesians-01#^ephesians-01-4|Eph 1:4-5.]]

**[4]** [[dei-verbum|Dei Verbum (DV)]] 2.

**[5]** St. Irenaeus, Adv. haeres. 3, 20, 2: PG 7/1, 944; cf. 3, 17, 1; 4, 12, 4; 4, 21, 3.

---

**[[1.1.2.0.pe|Previous]]** - **[[1.1.2.1.pg|Next]]**
