---
type: catechism
title: Article 3, Sacred Scripture – In Brief
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__PT.HTM
aliases:
  - 1.1.2.3.pt
  - Article 3, Sacred Scripture – In Brief
  - ccc-134
  - ccc-135
  - ccc-136
  - ccc-137
  - ccc-138
  - ccc-139
  - ccc-140
  - ccc-141
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-1
  - graph/bible-ccc
ccc_part: one
ccc_section: one
ccc_chapter: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-06
publish: true
description: Part One, The Profession of Faith. Section One, I Believe We Believe. Chapter Two, God Comes to Meet Man. 3 Sacred Scripture.
---

- PART ONE: THE PROFESSION OF FAITH
	- SECTION ONE "I BELIEVE" - "WE BELIEVE"
		- CHAPTER TWO GOD COMES TO MEET MAN
			- Article 3 SACRED SCRIPTURE
				- IN BRIEF

**[[1.1.2.3.ps|Previous]]** - **[[1.1.3.0.pu|Next]]**

---

# Article 3, Sacred Scripture – In Brief

134 "All Sacred Scripture is but one book, and that one book is Christ, because all divine Scripture speaks of Christ, and all divine Scripture is fulfilled in Christ" (Hugh of St. Victor, De arca Noe 2, 8: PL 176, 642). ^ccc-134

135 "The Sacred Scriptures contain the Word of God and, because they are inspired, they are truly the Word of God" ([[dei-verbum|Dei Verbum (DV)]] 24). ^ccc-135

136 God is the author of Sacred Scripture because he inspired its human authors; he acts in them and by means of them. He thus gives assurance that their writings teach without error his saving truth (cf [[dei-verbum|Dei Verbum (DV)]] 11). ^ccc-136

137 Interpretation of the inspired Scripture must be attentive above all to what God wants to reveal through the sacred authors for our salvation. What comes from the Spirit is not fully "understood except by the Spirit's action' (cf. Origen, Hom. in Ex. 4, 5: PG 12, 320). ^ccc-137

138 The Church accepts and venerates as inspired the 46 books of the Old Testament and the 27 books of the New. ^ccc-138

139 The four Gospels occupy a central place because Christ Jesus is their centre. ^ccc-139

140 The unity of the two Testaments proceeds from the unity of God's plan and his Revelation. the Old Testament prepares for the New and the New Testament fulfils the Old; the two shed light on each other; both are true Word of God. ^ccc-140

141 "The Church has always venerated the divine Scriptures as she venerated the Body of the Lord" ([[dei-verbum|Dei Verbum (DV)]] 21): both nourish and govern the whole Christian life. "Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path" (Ps 119:105; cf. Is 50:4). ^ccc-141

---

**[[1.1.2.3.ps|Previous]]** - **[[1.1.3.0.pu|Next]]**
