---
type: catechism
title: I. Jesus
author: Catholic Church
source: vatican.va
url: https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/__P1E.HTM
aliases:
  - 1.2.2.2.p1e
  - ccc-430
  - ccc-431
  - ccc-432
  - ccc-433
  - ccc-434
  - ccc-435
  - I. Jesus
tags:
  - catechism
  - catechism/part-1
  - graph/bible-ccc
  - term/expiation
  - term/jesus-christ
  - term/savior
ccc_part: one
ccc_section: two
ccc_chapter: two
created: 2025-07-27
modified: 2026-04-08
publish: true
description: Part One, the Profession of Faith. Section Two I, the Creeds. Chapter Two, I Believe in Jesus Christ, the Only Son of God. Article 2, And in Jesus Christ, His Only Son, Our Lord.
---

- PART ONE: THE PROFESSION OF FAITH
	- SECTION TWO I. THE CREEDS
		- CHAPTER TWO I BELIEVE IN JESUS CHRIST, THE ONLY SON OF GOD
			- Article 2 And in Jesus Christ, His Only Son, Our Lord.
				- I. Jesus

**[[1.2.2.0.p1d|Previous]]** - **[[1.2.2.2.p1f|Next]]**

---

**ARTICLE 2**

**"AND IN JESUS CHRIST, HIS ONLY SON, OUR LORD"**

# I. Jesus

430 [[jesus-christ|Jesus]] means in Hebrew: "God saves." At the annunciation, the angel Gabriel gave him the name Jesus as his proper name, which expresses both his identity and his mission.<sup>18</sup> Since God alone can forgive sins, it is God who, in Jesus his eternal Son made man, "will save his people from their sins".<sup>19</sup> in Jesus, God recapitulates all of his history of salvation on behalf of men. ^ccc-430

431 In the history of salvation God was not content to deliver Israel "out of the house of bondage"<sup>20</sup> by bringing them out of Egypt. He also saves them from their sin. Because sin is always an offence against God, only he can forgive it.<sup>21</sup> For this reason Israel, becoming more and more aware of the universality of sin, will no longer be able to seek salvation except by invoking the name of the Redeemer God.<sup>22</sup> ^ccc-431

432 The name "Jesus" signifies that the very name of God is present in the person of his Son, made man for the universal and definitive redemption from sins. It is the divine name that alone brings salvation, and henceforth all can invoke his name, for Jesus united himself to all men through his Incarnation,<sup>23</sup> so that "there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved."<sup>24</sup> ^ccc-432

433 The name of the Saviour God was invoked only once in the year by the high priest in atonement for the sins of Israel, after he had sprinkled the mercy seat in the Holy of Holies with the sacrificial blood. the mercy seat was the place of God's presence.<sup>25</sup> When St. Paul speaks of Jesus whom "God put forward as an expiation by his blood", he means that in Christ's humanity "God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself."<sup>26</sup> ^ccc-433

434 Jesus' Resurrection glorifies the name of the Saviour God, for from that time on it is the name of Jesus that fully manifests the supreme power of the "name which is above every name".<sup>27</sup> The evil spirits fear his name; in his name his disciples perform miracles, for the Father grants all they ask in this name.<sup>28</sup> ^ccc-434

435 The name of Jesus is at the heart of Christian prayer. All liturgical prayers conclude with the words "through our Lord Jesus Christ". the Hail Mary reaches its high point in the words "blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus." the Eastern prayer of the heart, the Jesus Prayer, says: "Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me, a sinner." Many Christians, such as St. Joan of Arc, have died with the one word "Jesus" on their lips. ^ccc-435

---

**[18]** Cf. [[luke-01|Lk 1]]:31.**[19]** [[matthew-01|Mt 1]]:21; cf. 2:7.**[20]** Dt 5:6.**[21]** Cf. [[psalm-51#^psalm-51-4|Ps 51:4, 12.]]**[22]** Cf. [[psalm-79#^psalm-79-9|Ps 79:9.]]**[23]** Cf. [[john-03#^john-03-18|Jn 3:18;]] [[acts-of-the-apostles-02|Acts 2]]:21; 5:41; 3 Jn 7; [[romans-10#^romans-10-6|Rom 10:6-13.]]**[24]** [[acts-of-the-apostles-04|Acts 4]]:12; cf. 9:14; [[james-02#^james-02-7|Jas 2:7.]]**[25]** Cf. [[exodus-25|Ex 25]]:22; [[leviticus-16|Lev 16]]:2,15-16; [[numbers-07#^numbers-07-89|Num 7:89;]] [[sirach-50#^sirach-50-20|Sir 50:20;]] [[hebrews-09#^hebrews-09-5|Heb 9:5,7.]]**[26]** [[romans-03|Rom 3]]:25; [[2-corinthians-05|2 Cor 5]]:19.**[27]** [[philippians-02#^philippians-02-9|Phil 2:9-10;]] cf. [[john-12#^john-12-28|Jn 12:28.]]**[28]** Cf. [[acts-of-the-apostles-16|Acts 16]]:16-18; 19:13-16; [[mark-16|Mk 16]]:17; [[john-15#^john-15-16|Jn 15:16.]]
